UltraNest

Fit and compare complex models reliably and rapidly with advanced sampling techniques.

Correctness. Speed. Ease of use. 🦔

About

When scientific models are compared to data, two tasks are important:
1) contraining the model parameters and 2) comparing the model to other models.
Different techniques have been developed to explore model parameter spaces.
This package implements a Monte Carlo technique called nested sampling.

Nested sampling allows Bayesian inference on arbitrary user-defined likelihoods.
In particular, posterior probability distributions on model parameters
are constructed, and the marginal likelihood ("evidence") Z is computed.
The former can be used to describe the parameter constraints of the data,
the latter can be used for model comparison (via Bayes factors)
as a measure of the prediction parsimony of a model.

In the last decade, multiple variants of nested sampling have been
developed. These differ in how nested sampling finds better and
better fits while respecting the priors
(constrained likelihood prior sampling techniques), and whether it is
allowed to go back to worse fits and explore the parameter space more.

This package develops novel, advanced techniques for both (See
How it works).
They are especially remarkable for being free of tuning parameters
and theoretically justified. Beyond that, UltraNest has support for
Big Data sets and high-performance computing applications.

UltraNest is intended for fitting complex physical models with slow
likelihood evaluations, with one to hundreds of parameters.
UltraNest intends to replace heuristic methods like multi-ellipsoid
nested sampling and dynamic nested sampling with more rigorous methods.
UltraNest also attempts to provide feature parity compared to other packages
(such as MultiNest).

You can help by testing UltraNest and reporting issues. Code contributions are welcome.
See the Contributing page.

Features

Pythonic

pip and conda installable

Easy to program for: Sanity checks with meaningful errors

Can control the run programmatically and check status

Reasonable defaults, but customizable

Thoroughly tested with many unit and integration tests

NEW: supports likelihood functions written in Python, C, C++, Fortran, Julia and R

Robust exploration easily handles:

Degenerate parameter spaces such as bananas or tight correlations

Multiple modes/solutions in the parameter space

Robust, parameter-free MLFriends algorithm
(metric learning RadFriends, Buchner+14,+19), with new improvements
(region follows new live points, clustering improves metric iteratively,
NEW in v4.0: refined local metric).

High-dimensional problems with hit-and-run sampling

Wrapped/circular parameters, derived parameters

Fast-slow parameters

Lightweight and fast

some functions implemented in Cython

vectorized likelihood function calls,
optimally supporting models with deep learning emulators

Use multiple cores, fully parallelizable from laptops to computing clusters

MPI support

Advanced visualisation and crash recovery:

Live view of the exploration for Jupyter notebooks and terminals

Publication-ready visualisations

Corner plots, run and parameter exploration diagnostic plots

Checkpointing and resuming, even with different number of live points

Warm-start: resume from modified data / model

strategic nested sampling

can vary (increase) number of live points (akin to dynamic nested sampling, but with different targets)

can sample clusters optimally (e.g., at least 50 points per cluster/mode/solution)

can target minimizing parameter estimation uncertainties

can target a desired evidence uncertainty threshold

can target a desired number of effective samples

or any combination of the above

Robust ln(Z) uncertainties by bootstrapping live points.

Usage

Get started!

Read the full documentation with tutorials at:

https://johannesbuchner.github.io/UltraNest/

API Reference.

Code repository: https://github.com/JohannesBuchner/UltraNest/

Licence

How to cite UltraNest.

GPLv3 (see LICENCE file). If you require another license, please contact me.

The cute hedgehog icon was made by Freepik.
It symbolises UltraNest's approach of carefully walking up a likelihood,
ready to defend against any encountered danger.

Contributors

Nicholas Susemiehl

Quinn Gao

Sigfried Vanaverbeke

Warrick Ball

Adipol Phosrisom

Pieter Vuylsteke

Alexander Harvey Nitz

Gregory David Martinez

Grigorii Smirnov-Pinchukov

Fabio F Acero

Jacopo Tissino

Benjamin Beauchesne

Kyle Barbary (some ellipsoid code adopted from https://github.com/kbarbary/nestle)

Adam Moss (some architecture and parallelisation adopted from https://github.com/adammoss/nnest)

Josh Speagle (some visualisations adopted from https://github.com/joshspeagle/dynesty/)

Johannes Buchner