Welcome to MARX’s documentation! — MARX 6.0.1 documentation

Navigation

 index

 MARX Parameters |

 next |

MARX 6.0.1 documentation »

Welcome to MARX’s documentation! 

Welcome to MARX’s documentation!¶

Current version of marx is 6.0.1

We now recommend to install marx together with CIAO as described in
https://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/ciao/download/ .
Of course, it is still possible to install marx from
source as described in Downloading and Installing Marx.

Warning

Marx 6.0 is not fully backward compatible with version 5.x. In particular,

The Verbose parameter now requires an integer for finer control of
the verbosity level.

We removed obsolete tools that convert marx binary
results into other formats. Going forward, the only supported tool for
this purpose is marx2fits, followed by standard CIAO
procedures to make images or extract spectra.

This version also improves error checking and user feedback in case of parameters errors
as well as some bug fixes.
See Highlights for each version of marx for a full list of changes.

marx is a suite of programs created and maintained by the
MIT/CXC/HETG group group and is designed
to enable the user to simulate the on-orbit performance of the Chandra
X-ray Observatory. marx provides a detailed ray-trace
simulation of how Chandra responds to a variety of astrophysical
sources and can generate standard FITS event files as
output. It contains detailed models for Chandra’s High Resolution
Mirror Assembly (HRMA), the HETG and LETG gratings, and all the focal
plane detectors.

If you publish any work that made use of marx, please cite the
paper Raytracing
with MARX: x-ray observatory design, calibration, and support (Davis et al. 2012, SPIE 8443, 84431A).

MARX in brief

Highlights for each version of marx

Downloading and Installing Marx

Current caveats for MARX

Running marx simulations

Reporting a problem or issue

Examples of MARX in use

Simulating a user-defined CCD spectrum with ACIS

Simulating pile-up in an ACIS CCD spectrum

Simulating a thermal plasma with the HETGS grating

HETG simulation of an extended source

Simulating an LETG/ACIS-S observation

Simulating two overlapping sources

Including background in a marx simulation

Replicating a Chandra Observation / Using ChaRT or SAOTrace

Detailed information on MARX

Simulating ACIS Pileup with marx

Simulating Aspect with marx

Using Response Matrices with marx

Using marx with SAOSAC

The spectrum and the spatial shape of the X-ray source

The marx Models for the Spacecraft

Simulating ground calibration data

marx accuracy and testing

Point Spread Function (PSF)

Wings of the Chandra PSF

Flight grade distribution

Reproducing an input spectrum

Source shapes in MARX

Coordinates on the sky and the chip

marx reference

MARX Frequently Asked Questions

The marx tool suite

Further marx parameters

Indices and tables¶

Marx Parameters

Index

Search Page

Contributing to MARX¶

Contributing code or documentation

Making a release

Preparation

Source repro

Documentation repro

Get the word out

Page Content

Welcome to MARX’s documentation!

Indices and tables

Contributing to MARX

 Next topic

MARX in brief

CXC@MIT

Navigation

 index

 MARX Parameters |

 next |

MARX 6.0.1 documentation »

Welcome to MARX’s documentation! 

 MARX support: marx-help@space.mit.edu
 Accessibility
 © Copyright 2002-2025, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 Created using Sphinx 8.2.3.