music

 Connexion

 Tout Public

 Back

 Le coin des curieux

 Search

 Olivier Hahn 

 Research Highlights 

 Visualizations 

 Software 

 Publications 

 JOBS! 

 music 

 music 

 Details 

 Category: Hahn Oliver 

 Last Updated: 01 June 2018 

what is MUSIC? - download - contact 

Welcome to the homepage of MUSIC - a program to generate zoom initial conditions for cosmological simulations. © 2013-2017 by Oliver Hahn 

Infos 

What is MUSIC ? 

MUSIC - (MUlti-Scale-Initial-Conditions) 

is a computer program to generate nested grid initial conditions for high-resolution "zoom" cosmological simulations. MUSIC currently has the following features: 

- Supports output for many cosmological simulation codes via plugins: RAMSES, ENZO, Gadget-2/3, Arepo, ART, Pkdgrav/Gasoline and NyX are currently supported. New codes can be added easily. 

- Support for first (1LPT) and second order (2LPT) Lagrangian perturbation theory 

- Pluggable transfer functions, currently CAMB, Eisenstein&Hu, BBKS, Warm Dark Matter variants. Distinct baryon+CDM fields are possible. 

- Minimum bounding ellipsoid and convex hull shaped high-res regions supported with most codes optimizing the high-resolution volume. supports refinement mask generation for RAMSES. 

- Parallelized with OpenMP 

Requires FFTW (v2 or v3), GSL (and HDF5 for output for some codes) 

user's guide (pdf)3.31 Mo 

Paper on arXiv 

Download 

go to code repository 

get zip file of latest version 

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Please subscribe to the mailing list if you have questions regarding the use of MUSIC. Important updates will also be announced through the mailing list. 

Consider using the version controlled access through the bitbucket repository for easier updates in the future. 

 In any scientific publication making use of MUSIC, please reference the code paper Hahn & Abel (2011) 

OK, get me a zip file of the latest version 

Contact 

mailing list 

get in touch 

UMR LAGRANGE

Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur 
Boulevard de l’Observatoire

CS 34229 - F 06304 NICE Cedex 4

Tél. : +33 (0)4 92 00 30 11 
 Fax : +33 (0)4 92 00 30 33

 Pages Personnelles

 Site Lagrange

 Annuaire

 Intranet

 ©
 - oca.eu - Tout droit réservé.
 2015 - 2026

 TOP