GBTIDL Data Analysis Software Portal

 National Radio
Astronomy Observatory

 NRAO Home >
GBTIDL Data Analysis Software Portal

Users Guide

Quick Reference

GBTIDL FAQ

Calibration

Reference Manual

Contributed Code Documentation

Examples

GBTIDL: Data Reduction for the GBT Using IDL

Download GBTIDL Now - 
Screenshots - 
Reserve License/Machine

GBTIDL v2.10.1 is now available

What is GBTIDL?

GBTIDL is an interactive package for reduction and analysis of spectral line 
data taken with the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank 
Telescope (GBT). The package consists of a set of straightforward yet 
flexible calibration, averaging, and analysis procedures (the "GUIDE layer")
modeled after the UniPOPS and CLASS data reduction philosophies, a
customized plotter with many built-in visualization features, and
Data I/O and toolbox functionality that can be used for more advanced tasks. 
GBTIDL makes use of data
structures which can also be used to store intermediate results.

The package consumes and produces data in GBT SDFITS 
format. Observers after May 31, 2005 have uncalibrated SDFITS data 
available to them at the end of a run; observers prior to this date must 
create their own SDFITS offline prior to analysis.

GBTIDL can be run online, and have access to the most recent 
data coming off the telescope, or can be run offline on preprocessed SDFITS 
files.

What if I don't have an IDL license? If you cannot download 
and use the package directly from your home institution, you can use one 
of NRAO's licenses by logging into your GB account, or by reserving the 
dedicated IDL machine in Charlottesville.

Can I use GBTIDL on my data from a single-dish telescope other than the GBT? 
With some extra work, yes. Please see the 
FAQ 
for a description and outline of that work.

Documentation

Available documentation is linked from the blue menu on the left hand 
side of this page.

Home | 
NRAO Home | 
Contact Us | 
NRAO Directories | 
NRAO Help | 
Privacy Policy |

Style and design from Stephan Witz, 5-12-2005; integration
from N. Radziwill; Content from 
GBTIDL Development Team.