GADGET-4

 GADGET-4

 Introduction

 Running the Code

 Simulation Types

 Configuration

 Parameterfile

 Snapshot Format

 Diagnostics Output

 Group Finders

 Special Features

 Examples

 Changing the Code

 Search

GADGET-4

Obtaining the code

Code paper

Documentation

Related resources

Contact info

GADGET-4

This site provides basic information about the GADGET-4 simulation
code, which is a parallel cosmological N-body and SPH code meant for
simulations of cosmic structure formation and calculations relevant
for galaxy evolution and galactic dynamics.

Obtaining the code

The code can be obtained through a public git-repository, hosted by a
gitlab server at the Max-Planck Computing and Data Facility
(MPCDF). The repository's page is

http://gitlab.mpcdf.mpg.de/vrs/gadget4

To get a cloned repository of the code, you can issue the command:

git clone http://gitlab.mpcdf.mpg.de/vrs/gadget4

Note that the gitlab repository site offers to submit questions, or to
propose patches to the code via pull requests.

Code paper

The computational algorithms realized in the code are described in
detail in the paper:

Springel V., Pakmor R., Zier O., Reinecke M., "Simulating cosmic structure
 formation with the GADGET-4 code", MNRAS, submitted

We kindly request to cite this paper in scientific applications using the
code.

Documentation

These pages represent the code manual and provide a technical
description of the code's usage that is not contained in the code
paper, including information about compilation, code configuration,
code usage, and output formats. This documentation is also available
as a PDF file for off-line reading.

A cross-linked documentation of the source code
is available for interactive browsing of the source code.

A talk by Volker Springel about the
code has appeared in Shaun Hotchkiss' YouTube channel of Cosmology Talks.

Note that you may also consult the wiki and issue tracking on the
gitlab code repository for additional information or problem
solutions.

Related resources

Website of the GADGET-2 code: http://www.mpa-garching.mpg.de/gadget

Website of the AREPO code: https://arepo-code.org

C++ Annotations by Frank Brokken:
https://fbb-git.gitlab.io/cppannotations
(This is an excellent resource to learn C++ if you have advanced
 knowledge of C. Note that GADGET-4 is written in C++.)

Visualization tool GalaXimView by Anaëlle Hallé:
 https://vm-weblerma.obspm.fr/~ahalle/galaximview

A PDF guide for installing GADGET-4 on Windows using the Windows Subsystem for Linux, written by Thomas Raveau.

Contact info

This page has been authored by
Volker Springel. To join a
mailing list for the code, please send an email to
minimalist@mpa-garching.mpg.de with the subject "subscribe
gadget-list". You can unsubscribe in the same fashion using
"unsubscribe gadget-list" for the subject line. Once you have
subscribed, you can also post to the mailing list. The emails
exchanged via this list are also
archived on the web.

Volker Springel, Max-Planck-Institute for Astrophysics, Karl-Schwarzschild-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany

Documentation built with MkDocs.

 Search

From here you can search these documents. Enter your search terms below.

 Keyboard Shortcuts

 Keys
 Action

 ?
 Open this help

 n
 Next page

 p
 Previous page

 s
 Search