SQUEEZE 3.0

1. Introduction

SQUEEZE is an image reconstruction for optical interferometry. It is designed to image complex astrophysical sources, while (optionally) modeling them simultaneously with analytic models. SQUEEZE is based on Markov Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) exploration of the imaging probability space, and reconstructs images and associated error bars from standard OIFITS data. SQUEEZE leverages the Open Multi-Processing (OpenMP) application programming interface to implement simulated annealing and parallel tempering, in the hope of avoiding the local minima better than classic gradient-based image reconstruction software. Another key difference is that SQUEEZE can reconstruct images using non-convex regularizers, e.g. the l0 norm for true compressed sensing.

SQUEEZE is developed by Pr Fabien Baron of Georgia State University and distributed under an open source (GPL v3) license. If you encounter bugs or if you have specific requests for additional features, models, or other enhancements, please send an email to Fabien Baron (fbaron@gsu.edu).

Main features of SQUEEZE:

Imaging:

Polychromatic imaging over a few channels (<10) with FITS output

Support for numerous regularizers: L0, Total Variation, Laplacian, Maximum Entropy, Dark Energy

Marginal likelihood computation for model selection

Full output of the MCMC chain including all probabilities

Modeling:

Uniform and limb-darkening discs, unresolved delta function, rings

Polychromatic support (a.k.a. SPARCO)

Bandwith smearing support

Minimization Engines:

Parallel simulated annealing with Metropolis-Hastings moves (default)

Parallel tempering with Metropolis-Hastings moves (-tempering)

See section 3.2 for how to choose between them, and for how the annealing schedule
works.

Supported data types:

Optical interferometric complex visibilities, differential visibilities, V2, T3 (amplitude and phase), T4 (coming soon)

2. Installation

2.1 Software requirements

SQUEEZE is designed to be cross-platform compatible. It has been
tested on several variants of GNU/Linux and on Mac OSX. Test on
additional platforms are most welcomed.

You need git, cmake 3.20 or later, and a C11
compiler. Everything else ships with SQUEEZE: CFITSIO is bundled in lib/cfitsio, OIFITSlib
comes in as a git submodule, and the random number generator is a single header. There is
nothing to install system-wide and no configure script to run.

OpenMP is optional but recommended: without it SQUEEZE still builds and
runs, but on a single thread, so -chains and -tempering lose their point. gcc, clang/LLVM
and the Intel compilers all support it.

2.1.1 OpenMP on macOS

Apple's bundled clang does not ship the OpenMP runtime, and the gcc in /usr/bin is only a
hard link to clang, so a stock macOS build is single-threaded. Install a real gcc from
homebrew:

brew install gcc

and point cmake at it (adjust the version to whatever homebrew installed):

cmake -B build -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=$(brew --prefix)/bin/gcc-14

Apple Silicon is fine otherwise: the build detects that -march=native is not an Apple clang
flag and uses -mcpu=native instead.

2.2 Installing SQUEEZE

git clone https://github.com/fabienbaron/squeeze.git
cd squeeze
git submodule update --init
cmake -B build
cmake --build build -j

The submodule step pulls OIFITSlib (from https://github.com/jsy1001/oifitslib), pinned to a
tested revision. It is not optional: cmake stops with an error telling you to run it if the
submodule is missing. Build directories are also kept out of the source tree, so
cmake -B build is the only supported form and an in-source cmake . is refused.

The binary is written to ./bin/squeeze. To check the build:

./bin/squeeze ./sample_data/2004-data1.oifits -w 64 -s 0.2 -n 200

which should converge to a reduced chi2 slightly below 1 in a second or so.

2.2.1 Build options

Option
Default
Meaning

SQUEEZE_NATIVE_ARCH
ON
Tune for the build machine's CPU (-march=native). Set OFF for binaries that must run on other hardware.

CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE
Release
Standard CMake build types.

For example, to build a portable binary:

cmake -B build -DSQUEEZE_NATIVE_ARCH=OFF

2.2.2 A note on -ffast-math / -Ofast

SQUEEZE is deliberately not compiled with -Ofast or -ffast-math. Those
enable -ffinite-math-only, which permits the compiler to assume NaN and Inf
never occur -- and SQUEEZE relies on isnan()/isinf() to reject flagged or
corrupt V2/T3/VIS points during OIFITS import. Under -Ofast those checks are
folded away, bad points enter the chi2, and the likelihood (and the annealing
temperature) can go to inf. Please do not add these flags back.

3. Usage

3.1 Examples

Note: SQUEEZE help can be invoked by typing 'squeeze -h'.

Classic imaging (spectrally grey) on a 64x64 image grid, with pixel size 0.2 milli-arcseconds

./bin/squeeze ./sample_data/2004-data1.oifits -w 64 -s 0.2

Parallel simulated annealing with 50 chains, starting from a random image for each chain

./bin/squeeze ./sample_data/2004-data1.oifits -w 64 -s 0.2 -chains 50 -i randomthr

SQUEEZE reports which chain fitted best and writes it as the final image (see section 3.2.3).

Parallel tempering with 100 chains and full MCMC chain output

./bin/squeeze ./sample_data/2004-data1.oifits -w 64 -s 0.2 -chains 100 -tempering -fullchain

Polychromatic imaging, e.g. 3 channels (1.2 to 1.35 microns, 1.35-1.43 microns, and 1.6-1.8 microns).

./bin/squeeze mydata.oifits -w 64 -s 0.2 -wavchan 0 1.2e-6 1.35e-6 1 1.35e-6 1.43e-6 2 1.6e-6 1.8e-6

SPARCO imaging (= spectrally grey image and polychromatic modeling)

SPARCO is the default parametric model. Its six parameters are, in order:
flux_star, UD (stellar uniform-disc diameter in mas, 0 = point source),
env_indx (image flux power-law index), lambda_0 (reference wavelength in m),
flux_bg and bg_indx (an over-resolved background: it dilutes the flux but
contributes no visibility). -S gives the corresponding step sizes; a step size of
0 holds that parameter fixed.

Here the star carries 48% of the flux at 1.6 microns and is unresolved, the image
follows lambda^-0.1, and there is no background:

./bin/squeeze mydata.oifits -w 64 -s 0.125 -tv 1e2 -P 0.48 0.0 -0.1 1.6e-6 0.0 -4.0 -S 0 0 0 0 0 0

To fit the stellar flux fraction and the environment index rather than fix them,
give those two a non-zero step size:

./bin/squeeze mydata.oifits -w 64 -s 0.125 -tv 1e2 -P 0.48 0.0 -0.1 1.6e-6 0.0 -4.0 -S 0.01 0 0.05 0 0 0

3.1.1 Choosing the parametric model

The model is selected at runtime with -modeltype; no recompilation is needed.
squeeze -h lists the available models with their parameters in order.

-modeltype
parameters

sparco (default)
flux_star UD env_indx lambda_0 flux_bg bg_indx

binary
delta_ra delta_dec flux_pri flux_sec UD_pri UD_sec frac_bw env_indx lambda_0

-P must supply exactly as many values as the chosen model takes; SQUEEZE stops with
the expected list if it does not. To add a model, follow the instructions at the top of
src/models/modelcode.c.

3.2 The minimization engines

3.2.1 Simulated annealing (default)

The annealing engine has no fixed cooling schedule. The temperature follows the current
chi2 instead, relaxing towards

T -> chi2r / chi2_t (chi2_t is set by -ct, default 4)

and is then floored at tmin (-tm, default 1). Concretely, T starts at 1, heats up as
it discovers how bad a random image is, and then cools only as fast as the fit improves.
There is no schedule to tune and no way to cool "too fast": the chain sets its own pace.

The consequence worth understanding is where it stops. Since tmin defaults to 1, once
chi2r < chi2_t the temperature floors at T = 1, which is the true posterior. The
engine then stops behaving like an optimizer and simply samples; the mean image it reports
is a posterior mean, not a best fit. That is usually what you want for imaging. If you want
posterior samples with error bars and evidence, parallel tempering (-tempering) does the
same job better and additionally gives you logZ.

squeeze also reports Best single-frame chi2, the single lowest-chi2 frame seen across all
chains, which is a crude MAP estimate that costs nothing.

3.2.2 Temperature floor and chi2 target (-tm, -fc)

The defaults (-tm 1 -fc 0) are what you normally want, and this section is only about what
happens if you change them.

Burn-in is declared when either

T < tmin (the schedule wants to be colder than you allow)
 or chi2r < chi2_t (the fit has reached its target)

With the defaults only the first test can fire, and since the temperature tracks
chi2r/chi2_t it fires exactly when chi2r < chi2_t * tmin, i.e. chi2r < 4. So tmin is
doing double duty: it is the temperature floor and, through that product, the convergence
criterion.

Do not lower tmin on its own. It removes the only convergence route the defaults have,
so no chain ever reaches burn-in: you get NO CHAIN REACHED BURN IN, the final image falls
back to the -depth heuristic, and the Best single-frame chi2 report disappears. Measured
on the bundled data at 64x64:

flags
T (mean over last 100 sweeps)
burn-in
chi2r

-tm 1 -fc 0 (default)
1.00, constant (floored)
reached
0.78

-tm 0.01 alone
0.21
never reached
0.80

-tm 0 -fc 1
0.68, fluctuating (sd 0.30)
reached, via chi2_t
0.85

The third row is the one case where lowering tmin is safe, because -fc 1 supplies the
other convergence route: with no floor the chain keeps cooling below T = 1 while chi2_t = 1
holds chi2r near 1 rather than driving it down. That is the classic "fix chi2 to its
expected value" reconstruction, but it is rarely used in practice and it does not fit the
bundled data any better than the default.

Note that cooling harder is not a route to a better fit: at low temperature the chain freezes
and stops exploring, settling for whatever minimum it happens to be nearest.

3.2.3 Multiple chains

-chains N runs N independent restarts, not N cooperating chains: they do not share
information, and each can end up somewhere different. Which one you look at therefore matters,
especially when starting from random images (see 3.2.4).

SQUEEZE ranks the chains by the chi2 of their mean image, writes the best one to the
filename you gave -o, and prints the ranking:

Output -- Chain ranking (chi2r of each chain's mean image):
Output -- chain 0 : chi2r 65.7756 (rank 3 of 4)
Output -- chain 1 : chi2r 1.3882 (rank 1 of 4) <-- best
Output -- chain 2 : chi2r 63.0660 (rank 2 of 4)
Output -- chain 3 : chi2r 618.2817 (rank 4 of 4)
Output -- Writing chain 1 (chi2r 1.3882) as the final image: result.fits

Every chain is still written individually as <output>_MEAN_chainN.fits (likewise
_MEDIAN_ and _MODE_), so you can inspect the spread yourself. A large spread means the
problem is multi-modal and the "best" chain is a choice, not a consensus, so it is worth looking at
before trusting it. If even the best chain has a poor chi2r, SQUEEZE says so explicitly.

Runs are reproducible: each chain's random number stream is a pure function of its chain
index, so chain N always follows the same trajectory regardless of how the threads are
scheduled, and re-running the same command reproduces every output file byte for byte. This
holds for parallel tempering too, since its swaps are deterministic (see 3.2.5).

3.2.4 Choosing the image grid

-w times -s is the field of view, which must exceed the largest scale the data constrain,
while -s itself must sample the resolution several times over. SQUEEZE prints the baseline
range in wavelengths at startup, and the two scales follow as 1/(2*Bmin) and 1/(2*Bmax):
9.0 mas and 0.86 mas for the bundled 2004 data, hence the 64 pixels at 0.2 mas used in 3.1.

Too small a grid shows up as chains stalling at a high chi2r instead of converging, and they
do not recover with more iterations. The ranking output (3.2.3) makes this easy to spot.

3.2.5 Parallel tempering (-tempering)

Annealing looks for one good image. Tempering samples the posterior instead: it runs -chains N copies of the reconstruction at a fixed ladder of temperatures and swaps states between
neighbouring temperatures, so the cold chain can cross modes that a single chain would get
stuck in. Use it when you want error bars, or the log evidence logZ for comparing models. The
cold chain (the one at the target temperature) is the reconstruction; the hotter chains only
exist to help it mix.

./bin/squeeze ./sample_data/2004-data1.oifits -w 64 -s 0.2 -chains 40 -tempering

The ladder runs in inverse temperature beta = 1/T, from beta = 1 (the posterior) down to a
small beta_min for the hottest chain. -tempschedc sets the initial spacing, but SQUEEZE
retunes the ladder a few times during the run so that the swap acceptance is about equal between
every neighbouring pair, which is the spacing that mixes best. In practice this removes the need
to tune -tempschedc by hand.

The hottest chain is not beta = 0. A beta = 0 chain would sample the prior on its own, but
the prior here (the regularizers) is unnormalised and sits nowhere near the posterior, so such a
chain never swaps with the rest of the ladder and wastes a slot. beta_min is 0.01.

Evidence: at the end SQUEEZE prints logZ from a stepping-stone estimator. The +/- is the gap
between its two one-sided estimates (forward and reverse) and is a real error bar: a large gap
means the ladder mixed poorly and the value should not be trusted. logZ is defined only up to
the unknown normalisation of the prior, so use it to compare reconstructions that share the same
regularizers and ladder, not as an absolute number.

Diagnostics: SQUEEZE reports the communication barrier Lambda (the sum of the swap rejection
rates along the ladder) and the round-trip rate (how often a chain travels from the hottest
temperature to the target and back). Lambda sets the useful number of chains: with fewer than
about Lambda + 1 the ladder cannot communicate from end to end, and adding chains helps. A
per-rung acceptance table is printed as well, and after retuning it should be roughly flat.

3.3 Display utilities - Visualization

SQUEEZE includes several visualization tools for GDL and Python (requires Astropy). With these you can:

Follow single-chain reconstructions as they run, seeing chi2 and regularizations evolve in real time.

Follow multi-chain reconstruction as they run, checking for chain mixing for parallel tempering or for converge for simulated annealing.

Analyze the full MCMC probability chain of a reconstruction.

Plot the residuals of the reconstructions.

To display and analyze the reconstruction process, a set of utilities
has been developped in several interpreted languages (IDL/GDL, PYTHON, JULIA).

squeeze_display: displays the ongoing reconstruction (chi2 and regularizers,
current image, previous final image). This requires using the option "-temporaryfits" in SQUEEZE to continuously write chain files.

squeeze_display_chains: displays the ongoing reconstruction when using multiple
chains, e.g. when using parallel tempering. This requires using the option "-temporaryfits" in SQUEEZE to continuously write chain files.

plot_res: displays the final reconstructed FITS image, as well as how well
it fits the data. To be used after reconstruction.