Cadabra: a field-theory motivated approach to computer algebra

 Cadabra

 a field-theory motivated approach to computer algebra

 Download

 Jupyter

 Quick start

 Help & book

 Tutorials

Reference
manual

 Papers

User
notebooks

 Contribute

 People

 License

 Source

News

See the change log for latest changes
 only available on github.

 Now available: Cadabra in the
 cloud, from your
 browser. Email cloud@cadabra.science
 if you want to get access (please provide some details about
 what you want to use it for).

 31 July 2025
 Release of 2.5.14 (changes).
 Various plotting improvements and fixes, improvements to the SymPy
 bridge and component computations, fixes for a number of binary
 packages, and speedups.

 7 May 2025
 Release of 2.5.12 (changes).
 Many new features and usability improvements.

 24 December 2024
 Release of 2.5.10 (changes).
 Various improvements to the notebook interface including dynamical
 graphics and better typesetting. Speedups for substitute (Daniel).
 Internal changes and improvements to the CI pipeline.

What is Cadabra?

 Cadabra is a symbolic computer algebra system (CAS) designed
 specifically for the solution of problems encountered in field
 theory. It has extensive functionality for tensor computer
 algebra, tensor
 polynomial simplification including multi-term symmetries,
 fermions and anti-commuting
 variables, Clifford
 algebras and Fierz
 transformations, component computations,
 implicit coordinate dependence, multiple index
 types and many more. The input format is a subset of TeX.

 Both a command-line and a graphical notebook interface are
 available, and you can also use Cadabra from Jupyter by using the
 Cadabra Jupyter kernel, or
 from TeXmacs.

 Designed for field-theory problems, with handling of
 anti-commuting and non-commuting objects without special notations
 for their products, gamma matrix algebra, Fierz identities, Dirac
 conjugation, vielbeine, flat and curved, covariant and
 contravariant indices, implicit dependence of tensors on
 coordinates, partial and covariant derivatives...

 Powerful tensor simplification algorithms, not just for
 mono-term symmetries but also for multi-terms symmetries like
 the Bianchi identity, or dimensionally-dependent symmetries like
 the Schouten identity.

 Allows for both abstract and component computations.

 A standalone graphical notebook interface which can also be
 used as a front-end for SymPy.

 Input and output using a subset of LaTeX notation.

 Programmable using Python, but also usable as
 a standalone library
 from C++.

Cadabra's design philosophy

 Cadabra is built around the fact that many computations do not have
 one single and unique path between the starting point and the end
 result. When we do computations on paper, we often take bits of an
 expression apart, do some manipulations on them, stick them back
 into the main expression, and so on. Often, the manipulations that
 we do are far from uniquely determined by the problem, and often
 there is no way even in principle for a computer to figure out what
 is 'the best' thing to do. 

 What we need the computer to do, in such a case, is to be good at
 performing simple but tedious steps, without enforcing on the user
 how to do a particular computation. In other words, we want the
 computer algebra system to be a scratchpad, leaving us in control of
 which steps to take, not forcing us to return to a 'canonical'
 expression at every stage.

 Most existing computer algebra systems allow for this kind of work
 flow only by requiring to stick clumsy 'inert' or 'hold' arguments
 onto expressions, by default always 'simplifying' every input to
 some form they think is best. Cadabra starts from the other end of
 the spectrum, and as a general rule keeps your expression untouched, 
 unless you explicitly ask for something to be done to it.

 Another key issue in the design of symbolic computer algebra systems has
 always been whether or not there should be a distinction between the
 'data language' (the language used to write down mathematical
 expressions), the 'manipulation language' (the language used to write
 down what you want to do with those expressions) and the
 'implementation language' (the language used to implement algorithms
 which act on mathematical expressions). Many computer algebra systems
 take the approach in which these languages are the same (Axiom,
 Reduce, Sympy) or mostly the same apart from a small core which uses a
 different implementation language (Mathematica, Maple). The Cadabra
 project is rooted in the idea that for many applications, it is better
 to keep a clean distinction between these three languages. Cadabra
 writes mathematics using LaTeX, is programmable in Python, and is
 under the hood largely written in C++.

History

 Cadabra was originally written around 2001 to
 solve a
 number of
 problems related to higher-derivative supergravity. It was then
 expanded and polished, and first saw its public
 release in 2007.
 During the years that followed, it became clear that several design
 decisions were not ideal, such as the use of a custom programming
 language and the lack of functionality for component computations. Over
 the course of 2015-2016 a large rewrite took place, which resulted
 in Cadabra 2.x. This new version is programmable in Python and does
 both abstract and component computations. This new web site, with
 new tutorials and all manual pages accessible online, will also
 hopefully help to make Cadabra easier to use.

 Since 2018 Cadabra is available on all major platforms (Linux,
 MacOS, Windows, BSD). Visit the Q&A forum for
 help using it.

Copyright © 2001-2025 Kasper Peeters

Questions? info@cadabra.science