jdaviz is a package of astronomical data analysis visualization tools based
on the Jupyter platform. It is one tool that is a part of STScI's
larger Data Analysis Tools Ecosystem.
This GUI-based tool links data visualization and interactive analysis.
It is designed to work within a Jupyter notebook cell, as a standalone desktop
application, or as embedded windows within a website -- all with nearly-identical
user interfaces. jdaviz is under active development, and users who
encounter bugs in existing features are encouraged to open issues in this
repository.

jdaviz provides data viewers and analysis plugins that can be flexibly
combined as desired to create interactive applications that fit your workflow.
In the most recent release (5.0), jdaviz has been refactored to combine what
were previously separate 'configurations' (Cubeviz, Specviz, Specviz2D, and
Imviz) into a single, flexible application that supports mixed viewer
types.

Image viewers support 2D images, and include tools for panning, zooming, and
aperture photometry, catalogs, and other quick-look analysis. Spectrum viewers support
1D and 2D spectra, and include tools for extraction, measuring spectral features,
fitting lines, among other analysis and quick-look tasks. Cube viewers provide a
view of spectroscopic data cubes (like those to be produced by JWST MIRI), along
with 1D spectra extracted from the cube. Table viewers, Scatter viewers
and Histogram viewers allow for interactive exploration of tabular data,
including source catalogs.

Mosviz still exists as an standalone configuration and as of v5.0 has not yet
been integrated into the main application. It is a visualization tool for many
astronomical spectra, typically the output of a multi-object spectrograph
(e.g., JWST NIRSpec), and includes viewers for 1D and 2D spectra as well as
contextual information like on-sky views of the spectrograph slit.

This tool is designed with instrument modes from the James Webb Space Telescope
(JWST) in mind, but the tool should be flexible enough to read in data from many
astronomical telescopes. The documentation provides a complete table of all supported modes.

Installing

You may want to consider installing jdaviz in a new virtual or conda environment to avoid
version conflicts with other packages you may have installed, for example:

conda create -n jdaviz-env python=3.13
conda activate jdaviz-env

Installing the released version can be done using pip:

pip install jdaviz --upgrade

For details on installing and using Jdaviz, see the
Jdaviz Installation.

Quick Start

Once installed, jdaviz can be run either as a standalone web application or
in a Jupyter notebook.
See the Jdaviz Quickstart guide for more details on installation and usage.

For more information on supported data types for loading data into jdaviz,
see the documentation for viewers,
data formats,
and data sources.

As a Web Application

jdaviz provides a command-line tool to start the web application. To see the
syntax and usage, from a terminal, type, for example:

jdaviz --help
jdaviz /path/to/data/spectral_file

For more information on the command line interface, see the
Jdaviz docs.

In a Jupyter Notebook

The power of jdaviz is that it can integrated into your Jupyter notebook workflow:

import jdaviz as jd

jd.show()

jdaviz also provides a directory of sample notebooks to test the application, located in the notebooks sub-directory
of the git repository. CubevizExample.ipynb is provided as an example that loads a JWST data cube with the
Cubeviz configuration. To run the provided example, start the Jupyter kernel with the notebook path:

jupyter notebook /path/to/jdaviz/notebooks/CubevizExample.ipynb

Help

If you uncover any issues or bugs, you can
open a GitHub issue
if they are not already reported. For faster responses, however, we encourage you to
submit a JWST Help Desk Ticket.

Recordings and instructional notebooks from live Jdaviz tutorials (as part of the JWebbinars series)
can be found at the JWebbinar website
under the "Materials and Videos" expandable section. Scroll down to the bottom of that section to
find materials from the most recent session (JWebbinar 24, March 2023).

License & Attribution

This project is Copyright (c) JDADF Developers and licensed under
the terms of the BSD 3-Clause license. This package is based upon
the Astropy package template
which is licensed under the BSD 3-clause licence. See the
licenses
folder for more information.

Cite jdaviz via our Zenodo record: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5513927.

Contributing

We love contributions! jdaviz is open source,
built on open source, and we'd love to have you hang out in our community.

Imposter syndrome disclaimer: We want your help. No, really.

There may be a little voice inside your head that is telling you that you're not
ready to be an open source contributor; that your skills aren't nearly good
enough to contribute. What could you possibly offer a project like this one?

We assure you - the little voice in your head is wrong. If you can write code at
all, you can contribute code to open source. Contributing to open source
projects is a fantastic way to advance one's coding skills. Writing perfect code
isn't the measure of a good developer (that would disqualify all of us!); it's
trying to create something, making mistakes, and learning from those
mistakes. That's how we all improve, and we are happy to help others learn.

Being an open source contributor doesn't just mean writing code, either. You can
help out by writing documentation, tests, or even giving feedback about the
project (and yes - that includes giving feedback about the contribution
process). Some of these contributions may be the most valuable to the project as
a whole, because you're coming to the project with fresh eyes, so you can see
the errors and assumptions that seasoned contributors have glossed over.

Note: This disclaimer was originally written by
Adrienne Lowe for a
PyCon talk, and was adapted by
jdaviz based on its use in the README file for the
MetPy project.