HEALPix - Features 

HEALPix 

 Data Analysis, Simulations and Visualization on the Sphere

Features
Gallery
Resources
Getting HEALPix
Documentation
Support
Credits 

Introduction

HEALPix is an acronym for 
Hierarchical 
Equal 
Area 
isoLatitude 
Pixelation 
of a sphere. As suggested in the name, this pixelation produces a subdivision of a spherical surface in which each pixel covers the same surface area as every other pixel.

Purpose

 The original motivation for devising HEALPix was one of necessity.
 Satellite missions to measure the cosmic microwave background (CMB)
 anisotropy -- NASA's 

 Wilkinson Microwave
 Anisotropy Probe (WMAP),

 and currently 
 operating ESA's mission

 Planck

 -- have been producing multi-frequency data
 sets sufficient for the construction of full-sky maps of the
 microwave sky at an angular resolution of a few arcminutes. The
 principal requirements in the development of HEALPix were to
 create a mathematical structure which supports a suitable
 discretization of functions on a sphere at sufficiently high
 resolution, and to facilitate fast and accurate statistical and
 astrophysical analysis of massive full-sky data sets.

 HEALPix satisfies these requirements because it possesses the
 following three essential properties:

 The sphere is hierarchically tessellated into curvilinear
 quadrilaterals. The lowest resolution partition is comprised
 of 12 base pixels. Resolution of the tessellation increases
 by division of each pixel into four new ones. 
 The figure
 below illustrates (clockwise from upper-left to bottom-left)
 the resolution increase by three steps from the base level
 (i.e., the sphere is partitioned, respectively, into 12, 48,
 192, and 768 pixels). 

 Areas of all pixels at a given resolution are identical.

 Pixels are distributed on lines of constant latitude. This
 property is essential for all harmonic analysis applications
 involving spherical harmonics. Due to the iso-latitude
 distribution of sampling points the speed of computation
 of integrals over individual spherical harmonics scales as
 ~N1/2 with the total number of pixels, as opposed to the ~N
 scaling for the non-iso-latitude sampling distributions
 (examples of which are the

 Quadrilateralized Spherical Cube

 used for the NASA's

 COBE

 data, and any distribution based on the symmetries of the icosahedron).

 Applications of HEALPix to data processing and visualization have now spread well outside the original CMB field,
as can be seen from the Resources and Gallery pages.

Main Features of HEALPix Software

 The HEALPix software is available in C, C++, Fortran90, IDL, Java and Python.
 In each of these languages are available an extensive library of HEALPix specific tools 
 and their supporting routines as well as a suite of programs implementing the
 key features of HEALPix. Each package allows all of, or most of, the following (and more):

 Spherical Harmonics Transforms:

 Fast simulation and analysis of full-sky maps of CMB
 temperature and polarization anisotropy
 (sky maps preview)
 up to sub-arcminute angular resolution

 Filtering of sky maps with arbitrary circular window

 Constrained and non-Gaussian realization facilities

 Highly optimised Spherical Harmonics Transforms library 
 (libsharp) 
 used by all implementations for better performance

 Forward and backward scalar and spin-weighted Spherical Harmonics Transforms

 Programs to manage, modify and rotate spherical harmonic 
 coefficients of arbitrary maps 

 Pixel manipulation:

 Pixelation of the sphere supported down to a pixel size of 0.4 mas (milli-arcseconds), corresponding to potentially 3.5 1018 pixels on the sphere

 Pixel queries in discs, triangles, polygons and strips

 Programs to search the maps for pixel neighbours and extrema 
 of a random field

 Median filtering of sky maps

 Mask processing facilities

 Support for multi resolution maps (aka, Multi Order Coverage maps or MOC)

 General:

 Comprehensive documentation 
 (PDF and 
 HTML); 
 web-based and email support

 Automated installation and build scripts

 Most critical routines are parallelized

 Visualization:

 Visualization facilities available in C++, Fortran 90, IDL, Java and Python

 Facilities to output HEALPix maps into 
 Google Earth/Google Sky compliant images
 and into DomeMaster format used in planetariums.

 Input/Output:

 routines to manipulate and visualize the 
 FITS
 files generally used for I/O

 For a detailed list of the new features added in the latest HEALPix release, see
 the Getting HEALPix page.

 For third party implementations in other languages (including Matlab/Octave and Yorick), see this HEALPix wiki page.

 For third party extensions of HEALPix capabilities, see the Resources page.

Latest News

HEALPix Software

 2022-11-18: HEALPix 3.83 released

 2022-07-29: HEALPix 3.82 released

 2022-01-25: HEALPix 3.81 released

Data Releases

 2020-10-01: Planck PR4 (2020) data release

 2018-07-17: Planck legacy (2018) data release

 2012-12-20: WMAP final (9 year) data release

Site Search 

 only search this site

 Search result will appear in a new tab

About this Web Site

Last Edited on 2019-12-19 15:13 UTC