MOOG

MOOG
 HOME |
 TEACHING |
 HALOSTARS |
 DISKSTARS |
 LABDATA |
 MOOG |
 SPECTRE |
 MISC

MOOG is a code that performs a variety of LTE line analysis
and spectrum synthesis tasks. The typical use of MOOG is to assist in
the determination of the chemical composition of a star. The basic
equations of LTE stellar line analysis are followed, in particular
using the formulation of F. N. Edmonds, Jr. 
(1969, JQSRT, 9, 1427).
Much of the MOOG code follows in a general way the WIDTH and SYNTHE
codes of R. L. Kurucz (see his web site: 
http://kurucz.harvard.edu/).
Below are instructions on downloading MOOG. If you
have trouble grabbing or decoding the code please email me at 
chris@verdi.as.utexas.edu.

The coding is in various subroutines that are called from a few driver
routines; these routines are written in standard FORTRAN.
The standard MOOG version has been developed on unix, linux and macintosh
computers.

One of the chief assets of MOOG is its ability to do on-line graphics.
This means that the plotting commands are given within the FORTRAN
code. MOOG uses the graphics package SM, chosen for its ease of
implementation in FORTRAN codes. Plotting calls are concentrated in
just a few routines, and it should be possible for users of other
graphics packages to substitute other appropriate FORTRAN commands. 

The current MOOG release (November 2019) is the only code that 
is actively supported.
See below for downloading instructions of this code.

Finally, financial support from the US National Science 
Foundation and NASA for many years in development of this code
is gratefully acknowledged.

abfind in MOOG

A standard MOOG running option called abfind force-fits abundances 
of species to yield computed equivalent widths that agree with observed
ones previously measured with other software packages. 
Here is a sample graphical output from this mode.

 Example of abundance output from equivalent width 
 matching: these are Fe I abundances from individual 
 lines plotted as functions of excitation potential (top
 panel), reduced equivalent width (middle panel), and
 wavelength (bottom panel). The dashed yellow lines
 represent the mean Fe I abundance, and the dashed blue
 lines represent (linear) trends of abundance with the
 three variables. The middle plot also contains information
 about the stellar model atmosphere used in this computation,
 and the bottom plot has information on the stellar
 equivalent widths. The vertical axis abundance units
 are logarithmic number densities on a standard scale in which
 log ε(H) = 12. The user can alter some of the
 computations (such as assumed microturbulent velocity)
 while the code is running.
 Click on picture to see larger image

synth in MOOG

The other standard MOOG running option called synth computes
a set of trial synthetic spectra and (if the user so desires) matches 
these to an observed spectrum.
Abundances can be deduced either bu visual inspection of the plot or 
by mathematical minimization of the observed-computed spectrum difference.

 Example of synthetic spectrum computations and
 their comparison to an observed spectrum: 
 This spectrum contains a complex blend of weak CN molecular
 lines and significant features of rare earth species
 La II, Ce II, Nd II, Sm II, Tb II, and Tm II. Some
 abundances have been altered from their input values,
 as listed in the figure legend, and the abundances
 of Tb and Tm have been varied for each synthesis.
 the colored lines represent the 4 synthetic spectrum
 computations, and the white dots represent the 
 observed spectrum. The bottom panel shows the spectra
 plotted together, and the top panel shows the "o-c" 
 comparisons of synthetic and observed spectra.
 The abundance units are logarithmic number 
 densities on a standard scale in which
 log ε(H) = 12.
 Click on picture to see larger image

How to acquire MOOG

You may obtain a copy of MOOG via ftp. The latest release is another 
overhaul of the code in visible and in background ways. 
Most users will not notice any changes..

To obtain the current version of the code, last uploaded November 2019,
click: 

MOOGNOV2019. The downloaded file will be called MOOGNOV2019.tar.gz

Not sure whether or not you would like MOOG? You are welcome
to download a pdf file describing the code.
It is called 

WRITEnov2019.pdf. 
Warning! This is a decent introduction to the code, but does not pretend
to cover all the possibilities for using MOOG.

Note: If do not have the plotting package SM on your system,
it is available at a modest cost. Send messages of inquiry to Patricia
Monger (monger@mcmaster.ca),
or go to the SM
web site.

How to install MOOG

Once you have obtained MOOG via ftp, on a unix/linux machine execute the
following command:

tar -zxvf MOOGNOV2019.tar.gz

This uncompresses to a diretory that is called moognov2019. 
Inside that directory you should end up with many *.f files, 
several *.com files, two Barklem damping data files,
and several Makefile.xxx files, one of which ought to be appropriate to 
modify for your own machine. 

Then you need to prepare the code to compile and link for your particular machine:
vi Moog.f (or "emacs", or some other text editor)

Instructions for this easily-done task are in the comments in Moog.f.
You also need the appropriate library-linking commands to be put in your
Makefile.xxx, examples of which are provided. Finally, compile and link:
make -f Makefile.xxx where xxx = "rh64", "maclap", etc.

The resulting executable file will simply be called MOOG.
Most problems in getting to the executable file are connected with the library linking
process, and a common issue is discovering where the libraries (like sm, X11, etc.)
exist on your machine.
Sorry, I am not an IT expert and can only give you general help here.

Acknowledgments

Many aspects of MOOG have been developed in collaboration with other
stellar spectroscopists, several of whom are named in the "changes" file.
Their contributions are gratefully acknowledged.
A number of grants over the last couple of decades from the 
U.S. National Science Foundation have supported my MOOG coding efforts.

 HOME |
 TEACHING |
 HALOSTARS |
 DISKSTARS |
 LABDATA |
 MOOG |
 SPECTRE |
 MISC