ndcube

A package for multi-dimensional contiguous and non-contiguous coordinate aware arrays.

ndcube is an open-source SunPy affiliated package for manipulating, inspecting and visualizing multi-dimensional contiguous and non-contiguous coordinate-aware data arrays.

It combines data, uncertainties, units, metadata, masking, and coordinate transformations into classes with unified slicing and generic coordinate transformations and plotting/animation capabilities.
It is designed to handle data of any number of dimensions and axis types (e.g. spatial, temporal, spectral, etc.) whose relationship between the array elements and the real world can be described by World Coordinate System (WCS) translations.

Usage of Generative AI

We expect authentic engagement in our community.
Do not post the output from Large Language Models or similar generative AI as code, issues or comments on GitHub or any other platform.
If you use generative AI tools as an aid in developing code or documentation changes, ensure that you fully understand the proposed changes and can explain why they are the correct approach and an improvement to the current state.
For more information see our documentation on fair and appropriate AI usage.

Acknowledging ndcube

If you use ndcube is your work, we kindly ask you to acknowledge ndcube in your
publications and presentations.

Installation

For detailed installation instructions, see the installation guide in the ndcube docs.

Getting Help

For more information or to ask questions about ndcube, check out:

ndcube Documentation

ndcube Chat Channel

Contributing

We love contributions! ndcube is open source,
built on open source, and we'd love to have you hang out in our community.

If you would like to get involved, check out the Developers Guide section of the SunPy docs.
Stop by our chat room #ndcube:openastronomy.org if you have any questions.
Help is always welcome so let us know what you like to work on, or check out the issues page for the list of known outstanding items.

For more information on contributing to SunPy, please read our Newcomers' guide.

When you are interacting with the SunPy community you are asked at to follow our code of conduct.