PINT

PINT is not TEMPO3

PINT is a project to develop a pulsar timing solution based on
python and modern libraries. It is still in active development,
but it is in production use by the NANOGrav collaboration and
it has been demonstrated produce residuals from most "normal"
timing models that agree with Tempo and Tempo2 to within ~10
nanoseconds. It can be used within python scripts or notebooks,
and there are several command line tools that come with it.

The primary reasons PINT was developed are:

To have a robust system to produce high-precision timing results that is
completely independent of TEMPO and Tempo2

To make a system that is easy to extend and modify due to a good design
and the use of a modern programming language, techniques, and libraries.

IMPORTANT Notes!

PINT has a naming conflict with the pint units package available from PyPI (i.e. using pip) and conda.
Do NOT pip install pint or conda install pint! See below!

PINT requires longdouble (80- or 128-bit floating point) arithmetic within
numpy. On native macOS ARM Python builds, numpy.longdouble is usually
just float64, which is not enough for high-precision timing. Prefer one of:

Linux containers on Apple Silicon (recommended): a multi-arch image such as
nanograv/ng20:cpu provides a native
linux/arm64 environment with true IEEE binary128 longdouble — full
PINT precision at native speed (no Rosetta). See the installation docs for
short usage examples, including optional pintk GUI setup.

Rosetta / osx-64 conda or Pixi: an x86_64 Python stack under Rosetta also
works (80-bit longdouble), but is slower than a native arm64 Linux
container. See conda-forge tips for Apple Intel packages on Apple
silicon.

Installing

PINT is now available via PyPI as the package pint-pulsar, so it is now simple to install via pip.
For most users, who don't want to develop the PINT code, installation should just be a matter of:
$ pip install pint-pulsar

By default this will install in your system site-packages. Depending on your system and preferences, you may want to append --user
to install it for just yourself (e.g. if you don't have permission to write in the system site-packages), or you may want to create a
virtualenv to work on PINT (using a virtualenv is highly recommended by the PINT developers).

PINT is also available for Anaconda python under the conda-forge channel:
$ conda install -c conda-forge pint-pulsar

The above two options install the latest released version. If you want access to the latest development version,
the source code, example notebooks, and tests, you can install from source, by
cloning the source repository from GitHub, then install
it, ensuring that all dependencies needed to run PINT are available:
$ git clone https://github.com/nanograv/PINT.git
$ cd PINT
$ pip install .

Complete installation instructions are available on readthedocs.

Using

See the online documentation. Specifically:

Tutorials

API reference

How-Tos for common tasks

Are you a NANOGrav member? Then join the #pint channel in the NANOGrav slack.

If you have tasks that aren't covered in the material above, you can
email pint@nanograv.org or one of the people below:

Scott Ransom (sransom@nrao.edu)

Paul Ray (paul.s.ray3.civ@us.navy.mil)

David Kaplan (kaplan@uwm.edu)

Abhimanyu Susobhanan (abhimanyu.susobhanan@nanograv.org)

Want to do something new? Submit a github issue.

And for more details, please read and cite(!) the PINT paper_1 and paper_2.

Articles that cite the PINT paper can be found in an ADS Library.
A list of software packages that use PINT can be found here.