PyPi

Conda

 The Multi-Mission Maximum Likelihood framework (3ML)

A framework for multi-wavelength/multi-messenger analysis for astronomy/astrophysics.

Astrophysical sources are observed by different instruments at different
wavelengths with an unprecedented quality. Putting all these data together to
form a coherent view, however, is a very difficult task. Indeed, each instrument
and data type has its own ad-hoc software and handling procedure, which present
steep learning curves and do not talk to each other.

The Multi-Mission Maximum Likelihood framework (3ML) provides a common
high-level interface and model definition, which allows for an easy, coherent
and intuitive modeling of sources using all the available data, no matter their
origin. At the same time, thanks to its architecture based on plug-ins, 3ML uses
under the hood the official software of each instrument, the only one certified
and maintained by the collaboration which built the instrument itself. This
guarantees that 3ML is always using the best possible methodology to deal with
the data of each instrument.

Though Maximum Likelihood is in the name for historical reasons, 3ML is an
interface to several Bayesian inference algorithms such as MCMC and nested
sampling as well as likelihood optimization algorithms. Each approach to
analysis can be seamlessly switched between allowing users to try different
approaches quickly and without having to rewrite their model or data interfaces.

Like your XPSEC models? You can
use them in 3ML as well as our growing selection of 1-,2- and 3-D models from
our fast and customizable modeling language
astromodels.

Installation

Installing with pip or conda is easy. However, you want to include models from
XSPEC, the
process can get tougher and we recommend the more detailed instructions:

pip install astromodels threeml

conda install astromodels threeml -c threeml -c conda-forge 

Please refer to the Installation instructions
for more details and trouble-shooting.

Press

Software in development at Stanford advances the modeling of astronomical observations

Who is using 3ML?

Here is a highlight list of teams and their publications using 3ML.

Fermi-LAT and Fermi-GBM

GeV–TeV Counterparts of SS 433/W50 from Fermi-LAT and HAWC Observations

The Bright and the Slow

HAWC

Extended gamma-ray sources around pulsars constrain the origin of the positron flux at Earth

Evidence of 200 TeV photons from HAWC J1825-134

POLAR

The POLAR gamma-ray burst polarization catalog

A full list of publications using 3ML is here.

Citing

If you find this package useful in you analysis, or the code in your own custom data tools, please cite:

Vianello et al. (2015)

Acknowledgements

3ML makes use of the Spanish Virtual Observatory's Filter Profile service (http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/svo/theory/fps3/index.php?mode=browse&gname=NIRT).

If you use these profiles in your research, please consider citing them by using the following suggested sentence in your paper:

"This research has made use of the SVO Filter Profile Service (http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/fps/) supported from the Spanish MINECO through grant AyA2014-55216"

and citing the following publications:

The SVO Filter Profile Service. Rodrigo, C., Solano, E., Bayo, A. http://ivoa.net/documents/Notes/SVOFPS/index.html
The Filter Profile Service Access Protocol. Rodrigo, C., Solano, E. http://ivoa.net/documents/Notes/SVOFPSDAL/index.html

 ThreeML is supported by National Science Foundation (NSF)