Flash Center for Computational Science

 Home
 About Us
 Research
 Flash Code
 Images
 Movies
 Publications
 Links

The FLASH Code

The Flash Center Code Group is pleased to announce the release of an updated version of the FLASH code: FLASH v4.8! 

The FLASH code is a publicly available, high performance computing, multi-physics application code. FLASH consists of inter-operable modules that can be combined to generate different applications. The FLASH architecture allows arbitrarily many alternative implementations of its components to co-exist and interchange with each other. A simple and elegant mechanism exists for customization of code functionality without the need to modify the core implementation of the source. A built-in unit test framework combined with regression tests that run nightly on multiple platforms verify the code.

FLASH CAPABILITIES

Physics Solvers :

Hydrodynamics: Unsplit PPM, WENO, PCM, GP; Split PPM; 2T+Radiation, Interface Capturing Hydrodynamics

Magnetohydrodynamics: Unsplit Staggered Mesh; Split 8 wave 

Full Braginskii Extended-MHD: Hall, Nernst, Seebeck, Cross-field Term, Biermann Battery, and Anisotropic Resistivity

Equation of State: Ideal Gas; Degenerate Ionized Plasma; Multimaterial Tabular (IONMIX, PROPACEOS, SESAME)

Radiation Transfer: Multigroup Flux-limited Diffusion

Diffusion and Anisotropic Thermal Conduction: Implicit with AMR and UG

Diffusion and Anisotropic Resistivity: Implicit with UG

Laser Energy Deposition: Geometric Optics with Inverse Bremsstrahlung

Current Drive and Circuit Models for Pulsed-power Drivers

Opacity: Constant; Multimaterial Tabular (IONMIX, PROPACEOS, TOPS) 

Particles: Tracer; Massive; Sink; Charged

Nuclear Burning 

Gravity: Constant; PointMass; Planar; Self Gravity

Cosmology

Transport Coefficients for Magnetized Plasmas: Magnetic Resistivity, Thermal Conductivity, Viscosity, thermoelectric transport

Primordial Chemistry

Simulated Diagnostics: Proton Radiography; Thomson Scattering; X-Ray Imaging

Infrastructure :

Driver: Unsplit; Split

Grid: Uniform Grid; AMR (PARAMESH); AMR (Chombo)

GridParticles: Lagrangian Framework

GridSolvers: Multigrid; Multipole; Barnes-Hut Tree; PFFT; Direct Solvers for Uniform Grid

IO: HDF5 ; PnetCDF

Multispecies

RuntimeParameters

Monitor: MPI Timers; Hooks for TAU

 Downloads

Code Request: If you are an external user and you are interested in using the FLASH code in your project, you can request access to the code.

Download: If you have been through the request process, you can download current and prior versions of the FLASH code here. 

QuickFlash-1.0.0.tar.bz2; Data analysis library for FLASH HDF5 files; see http://quickflash.sourceforge.net/home/index.html for more information. 

FLASH3.1_framework.tar.gz Open source versions of the FLASH3 code; primarily includes inheritance structure and setup script

FLASH4.2.2_supplementary_units.tar.gz Supplementary units, provided as-is for the FLASH4.2.2 release.

Contributed code: Find information and download links for other
 contributed code here

Flash Test downloads; the framework for running unit and regression tests on FLASH, or other codes with similar build process.

Visualization downloads

FLASH-Interface: GUI binaries for configuring FLASH.

 Miscellaneous

Documentation and User Support

Publications

FLASH Internal

 Main Navigation

Home

About us

Research

Flash Code

Images

Movies

Publications

Links

 About Us

People

Organization of the Center

Jobs at Flash

News Articles

Annual Reports

 Research

High-Energy Density Physics

Thermonuclear-Powered Supernovae

Fluid-Structure Interaction

Implicit Solvers

 FLASH Code

Code Requests

Download

Contributed code

Flash Test downloads

Visualization downloads

Documentation and User Support

Publications

FLASH internal

 Images

Movies

Links

 Copyright 1997-2021 FLASH CENTER. 
 The Flash Center for Computational Science is based at the University of Rochester and is supported by U.S. DOE and NSF.