ATNF Miriad Data Reduction Software

 Search

 Topic Lookup

 Miriad is a
 radio
 interferometry data reduction package of particular interest to
 users of the Australia
 Telescope Compact Array (ATCA). It can be used for the reduction of
 continuum and spectral line observations from beginning to end, starting
 with the loading of the data (either
 FITS, the
 ATNF
 RPFITS or old BIMA formats)
 through to image synthesis, analysis and display with publication
 quality graphics.

 In particular Miriad supports a number of niche areas including
 calibration and analysis of polarimetric data from the ATCA,
 multi-frequency synthesis imaging, mosaicing, ATCA pulsar bin mode, and
 specialized spectral line observations (e.g. Zeeman).

 Citing Miriad

 Please cite the following paper if you use Miriad in your work:

 "A retrospective view of Miriad", by Sault R.J.,
 Teuben P.J., & Wright M.C.H., 1995. In
 Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems IV, ed.
 R. Shaw, H.E. Payne, J.J.E. Hayes, ASP Conference
 Series, 77, 433-436.

 Miriad software and documentation are distributed under the
 GNU General Public
 License

 Send questions, comments, and bug reports concerning Miriad to
 miriad@atnf.csiro.au.

 Software download and installation

 Miriad now lives on GitHub. From there you can either do
 an install from source or download a binary release.

 User documentation

 The Miriad User Guide in HTML format
 and the Hyperlinked PDF User Guide

 Documentation on Individual tasks.

 Information on some ATCA data acquisition problems.

 Various data tutorials using
 Miriad.

 Programmer documentation

 Miriad software development: clone the github repo and follow the instructions in the README to build miriad and
 rebuild it after making changes. Submit a pull request on github if you have a contribution that might be of use to others.

 The Miriad Programmer
 Guide (coding) in HTML format.

 Related material

 Archives of the

 atnf-data-reduction mailing list.

 Archives
 of the

 miriad-devel mailing list.

 The BIMA,
 SMA
 and WSRT
 Miriad sites.