sunpy

SunPy core package: Python for Solar Physics

Release
Development
Community

sunpy is a Python software package that provides fundamental tools for accessing, loading and interacting with solar physics data in Python.
It includes an interface for searching and downloading data from multiple data providers, data containers for image and time series data, commonly used solar coordinate frames and associated transformations, as well as other functionality needed for solar data analysis.

Installation

We recommend following the installation guide in the sunpy documentation.
This will walk you through installing sunpy and all of its dependencies.

Usage

If you are new to sunpy, the best place to start is the tutorial.
The example gallery also includes a collection of shorter and more specific examples of using sunpy.

Changes

See our changelog for the latest changes in sunpy.

Getting Help

For more information or to ask questions about sunpy or any other SunPy Project package, please check out:

sunpy documentation

SunPy Affiliated Packages

SunPy Chat

SunPy mailing list

SunPy Community forum

Acknowledging or Citing sunpy

If you use sunpy in your scientific work, we would appreciate your citing it in your publications.
The continued growth and development of sunpy is dependent on the community being aware of sunpy.

Usage of Generative AI

If you use generative AI tools as an aid in developing code or documentation changes, ensure that you fully understand the proposed changes and can explain why they are the correct approach and an improvement to the current state.
For more information see our documentation on fair and appropriate AI usage.

Contributing

We love contributions! sunpy is open source,
built on open source, and we'd love to have you hang out in our community.

If you would like to get involved, check out the Developers Guide section of the SunPy docs.
Stop by our chat room #sunpy:openastronomy.org if you have any questions.
Help is always welcome so let us know what you like to work on, or check out the issues page for the list of known outstanding items.

For more information on contributing to SunPy, please read our Newcomers' guide.

When you are interacting with the SunPy community you are asked at to follow our code of conduct.