Galactic Dynamics in python

galpy is a Python package for galactic dynamics. It supports orbit integration in a variety of potentials, evaluating and sampling various distribution functions, and the calculation of action-angle coordinates for all static potentials. galpy is an astropy affiliated package and provides full support for astropy’s Quantity framework for variables with units.

AUTHOR

Jo Bovy - bovy at astro dot utoronto dot ca

See
AUTHORS.txt
for a full list of contributors.

If you find this code useful in your research, please let me know. If
you use galpy in a publication, please cite Bovy
(2015) and link to
http://github.com/jobovy/galpy. See the acknowledgement documentation
section
for a more detailed guide to citing parts of the code. Thanks!

LOOKING FOR HELP?

The latest documentation can be found
here. You can also join the
galpy slack community for any questions
related to galpy; join
here.

If you find any bug in the code, please report these using the Issue
Tracker or by joining the galpy
slack community.

If you are having issues with the installation of galpy, please first
consult the Installation
FAQ.

PYTHON VERSIONS AND DEPENDENCIES

galpy supports Python 3. Specifically, galpy supports Python 3.10, 3.11, 3.12,
3.13, and 3.14. GitHub Actions CI builds regularly check support for
Python 3.14 (and of 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, and 3.13 using a more limited, core set of tests)
on Linux and Windows (and 3.14 on Mac OS). Python 2.7 is no longer supported.

This package requires Numpy,
Scipy, and
Matplotlib. Certain advanced
features require the GNU Scientific Library
(GSL), with action calculations
requiring version 1.14 or higher. Other optional dependencies include:

Support for providing inputs and getting outputs as Quantities with units is provided through
astropy.

Querying SIMBAD for the coordinates of an object in the Orbit.from_name initialization method requires astroquery.

Displaying a progress bar for certain operations (e.g., orbit integration of multiple objects at once) requires tqdm.

Plotting arbitrary functions of Orbit attributes requires numexpr.

Speeding up the evaluation of certain functions in the C code requires numba.

Constant-anisotropy DFs in galpy.df.constantbetadf require JAX.

Use of SnapshotRZPotential and InterpSnapshotRZPotential requires pynbody.

Other parts of the code may require additional packages and you will be alerted by the code if they are
not installed.

CONTRIBUTING TO GALPY

If you are interested in contributing to galpy's development, take a
look at this brief
guide
on the wiki. This will hopefully help you get started!

Some further development notes can be found on the
wiki. This includes a list of
small and larger extensions of galpy that would be useful
here as
well as a longer-term roadmap
here. Please let the main
developer know if you need any help contributing!