ESO - Instrument Pipelines Page

European
Southern
Observatory

ESO — Reaching New Heights in Astronomy

Public

Science

User Portal

Contact

 Go!

 Science Users Information
  > 

 Science Software
  > 

 Instrument Pipelines Page

 29 Sep 2026

jump to navigation
jump to content

Science Users Information

Observing Facilities

La Silla Paranal Observatory

Paranal Facilities

La Silla Facilities

APEX

ALMA

E-ELT

Instrumentation Development

Future Facilities and Development

ELT

Instrumentation Development

Observing with ESO Telescopes

Policies and Procedures

Telescope Time Allocation

Phase 1 Proposals

Phase 2 Preparation

Phase 3

Public Surveys

Observing Tools and Services

Visiting Astronomers

Observatory Statistics

Science Software

Instrument Pipelines

ESO Reflex

ESO Data Processing System

Common Pipeline Library

Legacy Software

Science Archive Facility

Data Portal

ESO Data

Hubble Space Telescope Data

Virtual Observatory Tools

Catalogues, Plates and DSS

Tools and Documentation

Related External Services

ESO & HST Image Galleries

News and Updates

FAQ

ESO Data Access Policy

Science Activities

APEX Science Verification

Science in Garching and Santiago

Science in Garching

Science in Santiago

Special Visitor Programme for Scientists working in Ukraine

Fellowships and Studentships

PhD Thesis Topics offered by ESO Faculty Members

Instrument Commissioning

VLT/VLTI Science Verification

VISTA Science Verification

50 years of the ESO Fellowship

Science Publications

Science Announcements

ESO Science Newsletter

The Messenger

ESO Annual Reports

Old Science Announcements

Science and Technical Meetings

Seminars at ESO Garching

Seminars at ESO Santiago

Conferences and Workshops

Conferences 2027

Conferences 2026

Conferences 2025

Conferences 2024

Conferences 2023

Conferences 2022

Past Conferences and Workshops in Europe

Past Conferences and Workshops in Chile and Latin America

ESO Code of Conduct for Workshops & Conferences

IT Services

Library, Documentation & Information Services

Information Repository (PDM)

ESO Telescope Bibliography

eContent

Publishing Support

Vacancies

 Home

 Latest News 

 Available Pipelines 

 Homebrew Installation 

 Containers Installation 

 RPM Installation 

 Source Kits Installation 

 Support

 MacPorts Installation (Decommissioned) 

ESO Data Reduction Pipelines and Workflow Systems

ESO provides data reduction pipelines for most current VLT instruments and some La Silla instruments and will provide them for all new VLT and ELT instruments (c.f. complete list of all current instrument pipelines + manuals + source code). 

ESO pipelines consist of of series of reduction steps called "recipes" that can be executed one at a time. These recipes can be encoded in Python or C. In order to execute the recipes, they need to be fed with raw data, static calibration data and (possibly) the output from other recipes.

EDPS is the recommended environment for data reduction of ESO data. All current and future instrument pipelines for VLT and ELT will be supported by EDPS. The development of the older EsoReflex environment with similar functionalities stopped in 2018. Support for it is provided on a best-effort basis.

EDPS automatically organises data from ESO instruments for pipeline processing and orchestrates the execution of the various pipeline recipes on them. It can be easily configured and executed via a graphical user interface, which offers visualisation of the results and re-execution of selected processing steps. A command line interface and direct access to its Python building-block functions are also available.

The above systems use EsoRex or PyEsoRex to execute individual recipes. These tools can also be used to execute recipes one at a time directly from the command line or in shell scripts or other data processing systems. Recipes can also be called directly from Python using the PyCPL interface. There are currently no supported tools to carry out the data organisation, association or visualization outside of the EsoReflex and EDPS.

Test and Science data

Test data sets to demonstrate the reduction are available for each pipeline. They can be obtained as part of the installation procedure, or downloaded with this script. Public science data from ESO telescopes including the necessary calibrations can be downloaded from the ESO Science Archive Facility.

Installation

ESO pipelines are distributed for Linux and macOS and are known to work in Windows. Several installation options are available for each operating system. The different installation options for each operating system are tabulated below in order of recommended preference from higest to lowest, top to bottom. A more detailed discussion of the Pros & Cons of each installation method is provided here in case you want to make a more informed decision regarding the best install method for you/your use case.

The operating system dependent installation methods described below all include installation of EsoReflex, whereas the installation instructions for EDPS are operating system independent (except for RPM, MacPorts and HomeBrew methods which provide EDPS packages). 

In all cases installation from source code should be considered as "for experts", or at least users experienced with building/installing from source code either specifically the ESO pipelines or "software packages" in general.

Recommended installation methods

   macOS       

  Ubuntu    

Systems

    Fedora      

CentOs

   Other

   Linux

Windows

most

least

Homebrew

source code

MacPorts(*)

Homebrew

Apptainer

source code

RPMs 

Homebrew(**)

Apptainer

source code

Homebrew

Apptainer

source code

WSL2(***) with Ubuntu

and Homebrew

WSL2(***) with Ubuntu

and source code installation

(*) We annouce the discontinuation as of 2026-09-01 of support for the ESO MacPorts Repository in favour of Homebrew, which has the advantage of providing a unique package management system for both Mac and Linux systems. If you already have ESO pipelines installed, you can keep using them, but they will no longer be updated and may of the MacPorts Pipeline versions are already out dated compared to the current official Public Release versions. If you want to migrate to Homebrew, or simply remove ESO Pipelines and/or MacPorts completely, please see the MacPorts Decommssioned web page.

(**) For Fedora versions that are supported by ESO RPMS, we recommend RPM installation over Homebrew installation, but we often do not have RPMs available for the very latest one or two releases of Fedora, and then in this case we recommend Homebrew installation.

(***) Ensure you have the very latest version of WSL2.

 Last Update: 14.09.26 © ESO
 Send us your comments |
 Subscribe to Newsletter |
 Privacy Statement