The Einstein Toolkit

The Einstein Toolkit

Gravitational Waves

produced by a binary black hole merger

Binary neutron stars

simulate kilonova precursors.

Multiple Coordinate Patches

to be more efficient.

Solving elliptic Equations

on a multi-grid setup

Evolving scalar fields

in axi-dilaton gravity

Black hole-neutron star merger

mixed binaries

 Previous Next

 Gallery

North American Einstein Toolkit Workshop and School 2026

 The workshop was held at the University of Illinois
 Urbana-Champaign from 15-18 June 2026 and online. Slides are now
 available on the program pages.

 The Workshop provided an opportunity for researchers and
 students to learn about the Einstein Toolkit, and it
 offered a mixture of talks and tutorials. We had a number of
 tutorials on CarpetX and science codes based on CarpetX, the new,
 GPU-enabled version of the Einstein Toolkit. The talks,
 likewise, provided information for new users and will highlight
 exciting science cases and the latest developments in numerical
 relativity.

Weekly telecon

Join us at the weekly Einstein Toolkit
 Zoom call at
 9:00 am US Central Time on Thursdays.

Join us at the weekly CarpetX
 Zoom call at
 10:00 am US Central Time on Thursdays.

AboutThe Einstein Toolkit is a community-driven software platform of core computational tools to advance and
 support research in
 relativistic astrophysics and gravitational physics.

 About
 How to cite

Get StartedIf you have never used
 the Einstein Toolkit before, we provide
 a tutorial to get started You can also
 download the
 latest release and learn
 about visualize your simulations. 

 First steps
 Download

DocumentationA lot of the documentation within the Einstein Toolkit is
 generated from comments in the source code, and more can be found
 on the Einstein Toolkit Wiki or other documents. We provide links to guides, tutorials and references.

 Documentation
 Wiki

Interact with usThe Einstein Toolkit would not exist without numerous
 contributions from its community. It is easy to learn how you can contribute as well.
 Contribute
 Report a bug
 Get Help