TOM Toolkit

Documentation

The TOM Toolkit is a web framework for building TOMs: Target and Observation
Managers. TOMs are meant to facilitate collaborative astronomical observing
projects. A typical TOM allows its users to curate target lists, request
observations of those targets at various observatories as well as manage and
organize their data. Read more about TOMs.

Getting started with the TOM Toolkit

The getting started guide
will guide you through the process of setting up a TOM for the first time.

Reporting issues/feature requests

Please use the issue tracker to
report any issues or support questions.

Development Team

The lead developers of the TOM Toolkit are William Lindstrom
and Joey Chatelain,
professional software developers with the Las Cumbres Observatory software team,
together with Jon Nation, Curtis McCully,
Matt Daily and Mark Bowman. Rachel Street is the project's Principle Investigator.
The TOM Toolkit is grateful for the advice and collaboration with Andy Howell,
Edward Gomez, Craig Pellegrino, Jamie Burke and the rest of the LCO Science team.
The original Toolkit was developed by
Austin Riba, David Collom and William Lindstrom.

Our team very much welcome input from the community, and we are grateful to
the following people for their many contributions:

Dan Avner, NOIRLab

Doug Arnold, Liverpool Telescope

Etienne Bachelet, IPAC/Caltech

Ezequiel Contreras Martinez, UCSB

Griffin Hosseinzadeh, University of Arizona

Bryan Miller, Gemini Observatory

Brendan Mills, UCSB

Julien Peloton, Fink

Acknowledgements

We hope you find our software useful for your research. If so, we would be grateful
if you can include a brief acknowledgement in your papers and presentations, for example
"This research made use of The TOM Toolkit".
We would also very much appreciate you including a citation to our paper describing
the Toolkit Street, R.A. et al., 2018, SPIE, 10707, 11
(to export the BibTeX please click here).

Contributing to the project

If you'd like to contribute to the TOM Toolkit, first of all, thanks! Secondly, we
have a contribution guide that
you might find helpful. We are particularly interested in the contribution of
observation and alert modules.

Community Code of Conduct

We encourage developers to maintian a lively and civil discourse either on github or in our slack workspace.
Please review our code of conduct for information about what is considered unacceptable behavior and how to report it.

Developer information

For development information targeted at the maintainers of the project, please see README-dev.md.

Plugins

Different TOM systems have different science goals and sometimes need
different functions. Rather than require users to support all
dependencies from all possible functions, we support a range of optional
plugin modules for the Toolkit. Have a look at our list of plugins
see which would benefit your science goals.

Antares

The tom-antares plugin adds support
for querying the Antares broker for targets of interest.

tom_nonsidereal_airmass

The tom_nonsidereal_airmass plugin provides a templatetag
that supports plotting for non-sidereal objects. The plugin is fully supported by the TOM Toolkit team; however,
non-sidereal visibility calculations require the PyEphem library, which is minimally supported while its successor
is in development. The library used for the TOM Toolkit sidereal visibility, astroplan, does not yet support
non-sidereal visibility calculations.

tom-lt

This module provides the ability to submit observations to the Liverpool Telescope Phase 2 system. It is in a very alpha
state, with little error handling and minimal instrument options, but can successfully submit well-formed observation
requests.

Github

tom_registration

The tom_registration plugin introduces support for two TOM registration
flows--an open registration, and a registration that requires administrator approval.
Our philosophy is to keep the TOM as lightweight and adaptable as possible.

About the TOM Toolkit

The TOM Toolkit is managed by Las Cumbres Observatory, with generous
financial support from the National Science Foundation grant 2209852.
We are also grateful for support from the Heising-Simons Foundation
and the Zegar Family Foundation at the start
of the project.