sunkit-spex

Release
Development
Community

Usage of Generative AI

We expect authentic engagement in our community.
Do not post the output from Large Language Models or similar generative AI as code, issues or comments on GitHub or any other platform.
If you use generative AI tools as an aid in developing code or documentation changes, ensure that you fully understand the proposed changes and can explain why they are the correct approach and an improvement to the current state.
For more information see our documentation on fair and appropriate AI usage.

Installation

To install the latest release use pip or your package managers equivalent.
$ pip install sunkit-spex
$ pip install sunkit-spex[legacy] # with optional legacy dependencies

For more details and development installs see the installation guide.

If you are new to sunkit-spex, the best place to start is the example gallery it includes a collection of short, specific examples of using sunkit-spex.

Changes

See our changelog for the latest changes in sunkit-spex.

Getting Help

For more information or to ask questions about sunkit-spex please check out:

sunkit-spex documentation

#sunxspex:openastronomy.org

Acknowledging or Citing sunkit-spex

If you use sunkit-spex in your scientific work, we would appreciate your citing it in your publications 
.
The continued growth and development of sunkit-spex is dependent on the community being aware of sunkit-spex.

Contributing

We love contributions! sunkit-spex is open source,
built on open source, and we'd love to have you hang out in our community.

If you would like to get involved, check out the Developers Guide section of the SunPy docs.
Stop by our chat room #sunxspex:openastronomy.org if you have any questions.
Help is always welcome so let us know what you like to work on, or check out the issues page for the list of known outstanding items.

For more information on contributing to SunPy, please read our Newcomers' guide.

When you are interacting with the SunPy community you are asked to follow our code of conduct.

License

This project is Copyright (c) The SunPy Community and licensed under
the terms of the BSD 3-Clause license. This package is based upon
the Openastronomy packaging guide
which is licensed under the BSD 3-clause licence. See the licenses folder for
more information.