Aladin Sky Atlas 

Services

Others

Sesame name resolver

Dictionary of nomenclature

Contact us

Help

Aladin Sky Atlas 

Overview 

Aladin Desktop 

Aladin Lite 

Information 

→ en français 

Overview 

Aladin is an interactive sky atlas allowing the user 
 to visualize digitized astronomical images or full surveys, 
 superimpose entries 
 from astronomical catalogues or databases, 
 and interactively access related data and information from the 
 Simbad database, the VizieR service and 
 other archives for all known astronomical objects in the field. 

 Download
Aladin Desktop 

on your machine 

 Preview with
Aladin Lite 

in your browser 

 Install
ipyaladin 

for Python notebooks 

The Aladin sky atlas is available in two modes: 

Aladin Desktop, a regular Desktop application 

Aladin Lite a Javascript Web application. 

Aladin Desktop 

Aladin Desktop is a widely-used java tool capable of addressing challenges such as locating data of interest, accessing and exploring distributed datasets, visualizing multi-wavelength data. Compliance with existing or emerging VO standards, interconnection with other visualisation or analysis tools, ability to easily compare heterogeneous data are key topics allowing Aladin to be a powerful data exploration and integration tool as well as a science enabler. Aladin Desktop is based on Java techonology. It requires a classical installation on the user machine. 

More about Aladin Desktop 

Aladin Lite 

Aladin Lite is a lightweight version of the Aladin tool, running in the browser and geared towards simple visualization of a sky region. Aladin Lite is powered by the WebGL technology, currently supported by any modern browser. Aladin Lite is easily embeddable on any web page and can also be controlled through a Javacript API. 

Access Aladin Lite previewer 

We also offer an experimental viewer to visualize planetary surfaces HiPS datasets 

If you are you a developer interested in integrating Aladin Lite in your project, have a look at the dedicated documentation. 

Aladin Lite is also available as a widget for Python notebooks: ipyaladin. 

Access ipyaladin documentation 

Available data 

 Aladin Desktop & Aladin Lite use reprocessed data based on 
 HiPS technology (Hierarchical Progressive 
 Survey) with the capability to zoom and pan on any regions of the 
 surveys. There are about 1100+ HiPS surveys available for 900TB of pixels provided by several collaborative servers. 

 Aladin Desktop provides direct data access to most of the astronomical servers over the world (CDS, NED, ESO, CADC, MAST, HEASARC, NRAO, ROE, IMCCE, etc), and obviously, local user data. 

Documentation 

 Aladin Desktop documentation, 
 notably the FAQ 

 Aladin Lite documentation, 
 notably the API 

 HiPS documentation 

Mailing list 

Subscribe the Aladin mailing list by sending an e-mail to 

 sympa@unistra.fr with this unique subject subscribe astro-aladin. 

Browse the Aladin mailing archive through this 
 link. 

Copyright 
 Aladin Desktop & Aladin Lite are developed by the Centre de 
 Données astronomiques de Strasbourg.

 Both are distributed under GPL v3 licence. 

Acknowledgement 
 If the Aladin Sky Atlas was helpful for your research work, 
 the following citation would be appreciated: This research has made use 
 of "Aladin sky atlas" developed at CDS, Strasbourg Observatory, France 

→ 2000A&AS..143...33B (Aladin Desktop), 2014ASPC..485..277B (Aladin Lite v2), and 2022ASPC..532....7B (Aladin Lite v3). 

→ Thanks for acknowledging Aladin Sky Atlas

Contact - Legals