Radio Astronomy Simulation, Calibration and Imaging Library — RASCIL 2.1.0 documentation

 RASCIL

Background

Installation

Examples

Structure

API

Development

 RASCIL

Radio Astronomy Simulation, Calibration and Imaging Library

 View page source

Radio Astronomy Simulation, Calibration and Imaging Library

Warning

RASCIL is no longer maintained. Its last released version is 2.0.0.
Updates (merge requests) and Issues will not be accepted on the repository.
If you are an SKA developer, please refer to the Processing CoP Slack channel for any queries.

The Radio Astronomy Simulation, Calibration and Imaging Library expresses radio interferometry calibration and
imaging algorithms in python and numpy. The interfaces all operate with familiar data structures such as image,
visibility table, gain table, etc.

Source code: https://gitlab.com/ska-telescope/external/rascil-main

As of version 1.0.0, the library mostly contains high-level workflows and pipelines,
while the data models and a large number of processing components (functions) have been migrated
to ska-sdp-datamodels and
ska-sdp-func-python,
which are directly used within RASCIL.

As of version 0.2.0, the data classes are built on the Xarray library, offering a
rich API for applications. For more details including how to update existing scripts, see
Use of xarray.

To achieve sufficient performance we take a dual pronged approach - using threaded libraries for shared memory
processing, and the Dask library for distributed processing.

The role of the RASCIL in SKA Science Data Processing (SDP)

RASCIL was developed in SDP under the name ARL (Algorithm Reference Library) with the emphasis of creating reference
versions of standard algorithms. The ARL was therefore designed to present primarily imaging algorithms in a simple
Python-based form so that the implemented functions could be seen and understood easily. This also fulfilled the
requirement of providing a simple test version where algorithms could be tested and compared as necessary.

For an overview of the SDP see the SDP CDR
documentation

More details can be found at: SKA1 SDP Algorithm Reference Library (ARL) Report

Subsequent to the conclusion of the SDP project, it became clear that ARL could play a larger role than being limited
to a reference library. Hence, it was renamed to the Radio Astronomy Simulation, Calibration and Imaging Library
(RASCIL) and is undergoing continued development. The Algorithm Reference Library (ARL) is now frozen. The background
motivation and requirements of the ARL/RASCIL are detailed further in Background.

Background

Core motivations

Purpose

Stakeholders

Prior art

Requirements

Algorithms to be defined

Testing

Installation

Important information for MacOS users

Installation via pip

Installation via docker

Installation via git clone

Trouble-shooting

Examples

Running notebooks

Running scripts

Structure

Data containers used by RASCIL

Functions

Workflows

Apps

RASCIL and DASK

Use of xarray

RASCIL and WAGG

API

Processing Components

Workflows

Apps

Development

Documenting RASCIL

Build and Release process

Managing requirements

Developing in RASCIL

Index

Module Index

 Next 

© Copyright 2016-2025 See CONTRIBUTORS.
 Last updated on May 08, 2025.

 Built with Sphinx using a
 theme
 provided by Read the Docs.