Arepo code - moving mesh hydrodynamics - open source code

Arepo code

moving mesh hydrodynamics

Home

Getting started

About Arepo

Images

Movies

People

User Guide

News

Contact

 Search for:

 Welcome! 

 Arepo is a massively parallel gravity and magnetohydrodynamics code for astrophysics, designed for problems of large dynamic range. It employs a finite-volume approach to discretize the equations of hydrodynamics on a moving Voronoi mesh, and a tree-particle-mesh method for gravitational interactions. Arepo is originally optimized for cosmological simulations of structure formation, but has also been used in many other applications in astrophysics. 

 get started

 learn more

 Code repository online 

The repository to the code is now publicly available under… Read More 

 Code release paper submitted 

We are happy to announce that the code release paper… Read More 

 Hello world! 

The website is online. The code repository will follow shortly! Read More 

 Powered by WordPress
 | 
 Theme: Exoplanet by UXL Themes 

Privacy Policy

This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Cookie settingsACCEPT
Cookies

 Close

 Privacy Overview 

This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience.

 Necessary 

 Necessary

 Always Enabled

 Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information. 

 SAVE & ACCEPT