CARTA - Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astronomy 

 Home 

 Features 

 Gallery 

 Roadmap 

 Installation 

 Team 

 About 

CARTA 

Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astronomy, 
 is a next-generation image visualization and analysis tool 
 designed for ALMA, VLA, and SKA pathfinders. 

 Installation 
 User Manual 
 Helpdesk

 Latest stable 
 release: v6.0 (June 2026) 

 NEWS: CARTA received 2025/2026 NSTF-South32 Awards (Read more...) 

FEATURES 

CARTA key features 

CARTA adopts a client-server 
 architecture which is suitable for visualizing images with large file 
 sizes (GB to TB) easily obtained from ALMA, VLA, or SKA pathfinder 
 observations. It is impractical to process such a huge file 
 with a personal computer or laptop. In a client-server architecture, 
 computation and data storage are handled by remote enterprise-class servers 
 or clusters with high performance storage, while processed products are 
 sent to clients only for visualization with modern web features, such 
 as GPU-accelerated rendering. This architecture also enables users to 
 interact with the ALMA and VLA science archives by using CARTA as an interface.

 CARTA has two flavors: Desktop version and Server version. The former is suitable 
 for single-user usage with a laptop, a desktop, or a remote server in the "remote" 
 execution mode. 
 The later is suitable for institution-wide deployment to support multiple users with 
 user authentication and addtional server-side features. 

 Memory-efficient when loading images 

With ~1 GB of ram, a 16000 pixel x 16000 pixel image or a 16000 pixel x 16000 
 pixel x 1000 channel cube (~1 TB in size) can be loaded in seconds. 

 Parallelization and GPU-accelerated rendering 

Parallelization with CPUs is invoked in data processing. GPU-accelerated 
 rendering is adopted for tiled raster images, contour images, and catalog overlays. 

 Spectral line cube analysis tools 

Flexible multi-profile plotting capability is supported. Analysis tools such as 
 profile fitting, profile smoothing, moment map generator, and spectral line query 
 and labelling are out of box. 

 Customizable and reusable GUI layouts and preferences 

CARTA is equipped with a highly customizable and reusable graphical user interface 
 for various use cases. 

 Efficient catalog processing and rendering 

Catalogs with millions of sources can be loaded and rendered in seconds. Catalog 
 files are processed with 
 parallelization techniques and are rendered with GPU acceleration. 

 Efficient visualization with HDF5 (IDIA schema) images 

The HDF5 format with the IDIA schema improves the user's experience of viewing large 
 image cubes significantly. 

ROADMAP 

Release plan 

 Current release v6.0-stable 

The current stable release is v6.0, as a maintenance release based on v5.0, released on 18th of June 2026. Apart from bug fixes, codebase refactoring, and library updates, v6.0 also includes the following new features: 

Copy and paste region 

Move regions / control points with arrow keys 

Quick XY/Z/R matching 

Add pole mode to the offset coordinate system 

Image viewer as a popout browser window 

Auto-select catalog image overlay coordinate columns 

macOS electron app auto-updater 

FITS file association on macOS with the electron app 

 Next release v6.1 

 v6.1 will include the following major features 

Full support of channel map view 

Full support of workspace 

Full support of workspace sharing (carta-controller only) 

Initial support for time-domain astronomy tools 

Initial support of the Python scripting interface 

Initial support of the XRADIO-image schema in Zarr 

 Future releases v6.2+ 

This is a non-exclusive list of features we would like to add in subsequent 
 releases, but they are not 100% decided upon yet and depend on feedback from users, 
 resourcing etc.: 

Volumetric (pseudo 3D) rendering 

Collaboration tools (carta-controller only) 

More time-domain astronomy tools 

VO services 

Full support of the XRADIO-image schema in Zarr 

INSTALLATION 

Obtaining CARTA 
 v6.0 

Supported operating systems: 

Ubuntu Linux: 22.04 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish), 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) for amd64 and aarch64 architectures. 

Note for Ubuntu Linux users: 26.04 LTS (Resolute Raccoon) will be supported in v6.1 and beyond. 22.04 support will be deprecated in v6.1. 

Red Hat Enterprise Linux (or equivalent community distributions): 8 and 9 for x86_64 and aarch64 architectures. 

macOS: 14 (Sonoma), 15 (Sequoia), 26 (Tahoe) for Intel and Apple Silicon architectures. Earlier versions may work but are not tested. 

Note: 

Ubuntu Linux 26.04 LTS (Resolute Raccoon) will be supported in v6.1 and beyond. 22.04 support will be deprecated in v6.1. 

The homebrew installation support for macOS is deprecated starting v6.0. Please visit the "Stand-alone application" section below to download the electron app. 

 Site deployment 

To deploy CARTA at your institution as a web-based application for multiple users, 
 please refer to the CARTA controller documentation. 

To start CARTA, please refer to the user manual: How to Run CARTA. 

 Packages 

 Ubuntu 

 RHEL 8/9 

 macOS 

Ubuntu 22.04 and 24.04 packages are available from our PPA. Our packages may also work on other distributions based on these Ubuntu releases. 

sudo add-apt-repository ppa:cartavis-team/carta 

sudo apt-get update 

sudo apt install carta 

To start CARTA, please refer to the user manual: How to Run CARTA. 

We host the CARTA RPMs on the Fedora Copr service. Our packages should work on RHEL or the equivalent community distributions (like AlmaLinux or RockyLinux). 

Follow these steps to add the Copr repository and install CARTA 
 (root access is required): 

sudo dnf -y install 'dnf-command(copr)' 

sudo dnf -y copr enable cartavis/carta 

sudo dnf -y install epel-release 

sudo dnf -y install carta 

To start CARTA, please refer to the user manual: How to Run CARTA. 

Given that the new macOS electron app supports a built-in updater for future new releases, the homebrew installation support (which actually downloads the electron app following the homebrew installation workflow) is deprecated starting v6.0. Please visit the "Stand-alone application" section below to download the electron app. 

 Stand-alone application 

 macOS Electron Desktop 

 Linux AppImage 

You can download the CARTA Electron Desktop app for macOS by 
 clicking the appropriate download button below. We provide an 
 x86_64 version for Intel-based Macs and an arm64 version for Apple Silicon-based Macs. 

After downloading, open the DMG 
 installer and drag the CARTA icon to the Applications folder. 

To launch CARTA, click the CARTA icon in the Launchpad. Alternatively, you may create an alias for starting CARTA in your 
 terminal. For example: open your ~/.zshrc file (or ~/.bashrc if you use bash) in 
 a text editor and add the following line: 

alias carta='/Applications/CARTA.app/Contents/MacOS/CARTA' 

Then enter source ~/.zshrc (or 
 source ~/.bashrc) in the terminal. 

Now you will be able to start CARTA simply by typing carta 
 in the terminal. 

DOWNLOAD - Intel Mac 
 DOWNLOAD - Apple Silicon Mac 

The CARTA Linux AppImage does not require root access. You simply 
 download, extract, and run it. 
 It uses your default web browser to display the CARTA graphical 
 interface. 
 The AppImage can run universally on Ubuntu and RedHat 
 platforms (and should also work on other distributions), but there are separate versions for the x86_64 and aarch64 
 architectures. 

Either click on one of the download buttons below, or run: wget https://github.com/CARTAvis/carta/releases/latest/download/carta.AppImage.$(arch).tgz 

Extract the tarball: tar -xzf carta.AppImage.$(arch).tgz 

To start CARTA, please refer to the user manual: How to Run CARTA. 

Note: If you wish to run the AppImage inside a Docker container, or your 
 system has trouble with FUSE, please prefix with the following 
 environment variable: 

APPIMAGE_EXTRACT_AND_RUN=1 ./carta-x86_64.AppImage 

DOWNLOAD - x86_64 
 DOWNLOAD - aarch64 

 Docker 

CARTA is available in the form of a Docker container from Docker Hub. 
 This version can be used to run CARTA on unsupported platforms such as macOS 
 10.14. 

With Docker installed and running 
 on your system, simply enter the following command in your terminal: 

docker run --rm -ti -p 3002:3002 -v $PWD:/images -v $HOME/.carta:/home/cartauser/.carta cartavis/carta:latest 

This will download the latest version of CARTA from Docker Hub and run it using your 
 current directory ($PWD) in the CARTA file-browser. A unique URL will be 
 displayed in the terminal. 
 Copy & Paste the unique URL into your local web browser in order to access the CARTA 
 frontend interface. 

Please refer to the user manual for more information: How to Run CARTA. 

Please refer to the release note and feature highlights. 

Known critical bugs: frontend, backend, controller 

Known bugs: frontend, backend, controller 

For more information, please refer to the user manual. 

In case of any issues encountered during the installation, please contact the CARTA 
 helpdesk. 

To obtain previous release versions, please refer to https://github.com/CARTAvis/carta/releases. 

TEAM 

CARTA Development team 

Academia Sinica Institute of 
 Astronomy and Astrophysics (ASIAA) 
 ASIAA CASA Development Center (ACDC) acknowledges the grant 
 from the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan for the ALMA-NA collaboration. 

Inter-University Institute for Data 
 Intensive Astronomy (IDIA) 
 The Inter-University Institute for Data Intensive Astronomy is a partnership of 
 three 
 South African universities: the University of Cape Town, the University of 
 the Western Cape and the University of Pretoria. 

National Radio Astronomy Observatory 
 (NRAO) 
 The National Radio Astronomy Observatory is a facility of the National 
 Science Foundation operated under cooperative agreement by Associated Universities, Inc 

Department of Physics, 
 University of Alberta 
 The Department of Physics at the University of Alberta has contributed to the CARTA 
 project 
 thanks to support from the National Radio Astronomy Observatory under an ALMA 
 Development 
 Project and from the Canada Foundation for Innovation as part of the 
 Canadian Initiative for Radio Astronomy Data Analysis (CIRADA). 

Australian SKA Regional Centre 

 The Australian SKA Regional Centre (AusSRC) plays a central role in preparing Australia for the transformational science that will be delivered by the SKA telescopes. AusSRC represents the Australian node of the SKA Regional Centre Network (SRCNet). 

ABOUT 

Project information 

 CARTA publications 

 Journal

 Development and application of an HDF5 schema for SKA-scale image cube 
 visualization

 CARTA—Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astronomy: A Tool for Big Imaging Data 

 Proceedings and others

 CARTA: Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astronomy

 CARTA: Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astronomy

 CARTA: Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astronomy

 CARTA: Cube Analysis and Rendering Tool for Astronomy

 The 
 ALMA Science Archive Reaches a Major Milestone

 Codebase 

CARTA is mainly built in C++, TypeScript, and JavaScript, and 
 with the following third-party libraries. Check out the codebase on Github. 

 AST: http://starlink.eao.hawaii.edu/starlink/AST 

 Blueprint: https://blueprintjs.com 

 casacore: https://casacore.github.io 

 CASA source code: https://casa.nrao.edu/index.shtml 

 Chart.js: https://www.chartjs.org 

 Electron: https://electronjs.org 

 GoldenLayout: https://golden-layout.com (<= v5.1) 

FlexLayout: https://github.com/caplin/FlexLayout (>= v6.0) 

 GSL: https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl 

 MobX: https://mobx.js.org 

 MongoDB: https://www.mongodb.com 

 node.js: https://nodejs.org 

 Plotly: https://plotly.com 

 Protocol buffers: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers 

 Pugixml: https://pugixml.org 

 React: https://reactjs.org 

 spdlog: https://github.com/gabime/spdlog 

 sse2neon: https://github.com/DLTcollab/sse2neon 

 uWebsockets: https://github.com/uNetworking/uWebSockets 

 WebAssembly: https://webassembly.org 

 Citation 

Please use the DOI 10.5281/zenodo.3377984 and the bibtex of the CARTA overview paper as citations when using CARTA for 
 publications. 

 Copyright (C) 2018-2026 ASIAA, IDIA, NRAO, Department of Physics, University of Alberta, and AusSRC. This 
 program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 3 as 
 published by the Free Software Foundation. 
 The banner image of M51 is rendered with CARTA using an HST 
 image as the raster and a CO 1-0 image from the PAWS 
 project as contours. The award images from the CARTA image competition are contributed by Kyra Kummer and Tim Galvin.

 This webpage is hosted on GitHub Pages — Theme by ShapingRain with customization.