PyVO

PyVO is a package providing access to remote data and services of the
Virtual observatory (VO) using Python.

Its development was launched by the NSF/NASA-funded Virtual Astronomical
Observatory (VAO) project (formerly under the name VAOpy) as part of its
initiative to bring VO capabilities to desktop.

PyVO main goal is to allow astronomers and tool developers to access data and
services from remote archives and other web resources. It takes
advantage of VO standards to give access to thousands of catalogs,
data archives, information services, and analysis tools. It also
takes advantage of the general capabilities of Astopy (and numpy), and
so a secondary goal is to provide a development platform for prototypes for
functionalities that are under development and not yet accepted as a VO standard.

Source code can be found on GitHub

Installation and Requirements

Releases of PyVO are available from PyPI
thus, it and its prerequisites can be most easily installed using pip:

pip install pyvo

Releases are also conda packaged and available on the conda-forge
channel.

To install from source use pip:

pip install .[all]

Using the developer version of PyVO in testing

We recommend and encourage testing against the development version of PyVO in CI,
both for dependent libraries and notebook providers. As PyVO is a pure Python library, this can be
done as easily as pip installing the developer version from GitHub:

pip install git+https://github.com/astropy/pyvo.git#egg=pyvo

An example for setting up development version testing for a library as a GitHub Actions Workflow can
be found in astroquery.

Examples

Many instructive examples can be found in the PyVO Documentation.
Additional examples can be found in the examples directory.

Unit Tests

PyVO uses the Astropy framework for unit tests which is built into the
setup script. To run the tests, type:

pip install .[test]
pytest

This will run all unit tests that do not require a network
connection. To run all tests, including those that access the
network, add the --remote-data option:

pytest --remote-data