Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA)

WARNING: The default main branch is the development version of
MESA and is not guaranteed to function correctly. If you are using
MESA, you should use an official release version.

Overview

MESA is a powerful and versatile open-source software suite built to
allow users to run experiments in stellar evolution.
Stellar evolution calculations (i.e., stellar evolution tracks and
detailed information about the evolution of internal and global
properties) are a basic tool that enable a broad range of research in
astrophysics. Areas that critically depend on high-fidelity and modern
stellar evolution include asteroseismology, nuclear astrophysics,
stellar populations, chemical evolution and population synthesis,
astrobiology, binary stars, variable stars, supernovae, novae, compact
objects, tidal disruption events, stellar hydrodynamics, and stellar activity.

New observational capabilities are emerging in these fields that place
a high demand on exploration of stellar dependencies on mass,
metallicity and age. So, even though one dimensional stellar evolution
is a mature discipline, we continue to ask new questions of stars.
Some important aspects of stars are truly three-dimensional, such as
convection, rotation, and magnetism. These aspects remain in the realm
of research frontiers with evolving understanding and insights, quite
often profound. However, much remains to be gained scientifically (and
pedagogically) by accurate one-dimensional calculations, and this is
the focus of MESA.

Links

Landing Page for links to all things MESA.

Code Repository on GitHub (this page).

Documentation for up-to-date information about installing and running MESA.

MESA Users Mailing List for info about new releases, news items, and requests for help/bug reports.

MESA Zenodo Community for downloading official release versions, SDKs, and MESA project inlists.

MESA Summer Schools for information about past and future summer schools.

mesa_reader to interact and plot data from MESA in Python.

MESA Marketplace for resources for published papers using MESA.

mesa-contrib for community contributed procedures.

Download

MESA Official Release Version for the latest release of MESA.

MESA SDK for: MacOS (ARM), MacOS (Intel), Linux (Intel/AMD).

For Developers

MESA Test Hub to view results of regression testing.

MESA Jenkins to view nightly Jenkins test runs.

mesa_test tool to run the test suite and upload results to the MESA Test Hub.

mesa-dev yt channel youtube channel for recorded dev meetings.

Support

MESA is made possible thanks to support from

Citing

If you find MESA useful in your work, please star the repository and cite the papers in the citation file.